README.md, before:

# Matt Rangel's Notes

- [Matt Rangel's Main Github Page][2]

## Google Project Management Certificate

Please see the below links for my Project Management course notes.

- [Google Project Management Certificate](./googlePmCert/googlePmCert.md)

## Software Engineering Reading Notes

Please see the below links for my web development notes and my journey to learn.

- [Code Fellows Bootcamp](./CodeFellows/README.md)
- [React Road Map Notes](./reactRoadmap/README.md)
- [Data Structures and Algorithms](https://github.com/rangelMatt/dsa-exercises)

## Social Media Posts

Please see the below link for my posts on Social Media, currently only posting on LinkedIn.

- [Matt's Musings, _or "a-musings"_](./newsLetter/README.md)

## Athletic Notes

Please see the below link for my notes my athletic journey.

- [Athletic Notes](./athleticNotes/README.md)

## Growth Mindset

### Lifelong Learner

Hello, I am Matt, and I love to learn. But it doesn't mean that I don't get _frustrated_ and want to quit sometimes. I live in a constant battle of wanting to learn something quickly and knowing it immediately to ~~throwing the computer against the wall~~ being okay with struggling to learn a new concept.

### What is Growth Mindset

![growth_mindset](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/95889943/146064901-7bef9445-55b0-4c31-9e17-badc8edc9e97.jpeg)

A Growth Mindset is something that anyone can achieve but hard to conquer, because it is unconquerable. It is something that needs to be practiced everyday. It's when you face a difficult obstacle that is like a wall you can not climb or breakthrough, but finding a way around it anyways. The motivation is not what's on the otherside of the wall, but the steps on how to get to the otherside of the wall. Seeing others accomplishing these same feats, and being inspired to do the same and not viewing it as a threat.

I can safely say that I have a fixed mindset, but I also practice having a growth mindset. This is like a muscle that needs to be exercised on a consistent basis. If it is not exercised, the less one will be able to benefit in the successes in life. It's ok to fail, but don't quit. Keep moving forward.

### This is how I will keep myself in a growth mindset

- Talk through the steps of an obstacle, out loud. Write down clues as they materialize.
- Recognizing that I am getting stuck or hitting a roadblock, then stand up, put down the project that is sucking the rhythm out, walk away, and return when I'm feeling more inspired.
- This should lead to more successes of getting back at it to do one more thing, then another, and before I realize it, I've got my groove back.

---

### Summary

Consciously stopping and thinking about the growth mindset when effort is being required/asked of. No pain, no gain is true. I do a physical work out every day to remind my mind of this saying. I have to push through mentally to either get out of bed, do an extra rep, or an extra lap. This is to remind my brain, outside of working out, that I can put in the extra effort at work, and with family and friends as well.

[Matt Rangel][2]

[2]: https://github.com/rangelMatt "Matt's GitHub"

> `When you want something, all the universe conspires in helping you to achieve it.` — [The Alchemist][1] by Paulo Coelho

[1]: https://g.co/kgs/Tz6J9W "The Universe Conspires"

Please click [here][2] for my Main GitHub Page.

Commit message:

Completed in product experiments notes

README.md, after:

# Matt Rangel's Notes

- [Matt Rangel's Main Github Page][2]

## Google Project Management Certificate

Please see the below links for my Project Management course notes.

- [Google Project Management Certificate](./googlePmCert/googlePmCert.md)

## Product Management Notes

- [The three "PM"s: Differentiating between Product, Project, and Program Management](./productManager/threePMs.md)
- [6 In-Product Experiment Types for Continuous Discovery (& How to Run Them Effectively)](./productManager/inProductExperiments.md)

## Software Engineering Reading Notes

Please see the below links for my web development notes and my journey to learn.

- [Code Fellows Bootcamp](./CodeFellows/README.md)
- [React Road Map Notes](./reactRoadmap/README.md)
- [Data Structures and Algorithms](https://github.com/rangelMatt/dsa-exercises)

## Social Media Posts

Please see the below link for my posts on Social Media, currently only posting on LinkedIn.

- [Matt's Musings, _or "a-musings"_](./newsLetter/README.md)

## Athletic Notes

Please see the below link for my notes my athletic journey.

- [Athletic Notes](./athleticNotes/README.md)

## Growth Mindset

### Lifelong Learner

Hello, I am Matt, and I love to learn. But it doesn't mean that I don't get _frustrated_ and want to quit sometimes. I live in a constant battle of wanting to learn something quickly and knowing it immediately to ~~throwing the computer against the wall~~ being okay with struggling to learn a new concept.

### What is Growth Mindset

![growth_mindset](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/95889943/146064901-7bef9445-55b0-4c31-9e17-badc8edc9e97.jpeg)

A Growth Mindset is something that anyone can achieve but hard to conquer, because it is unconquerable. It is something that needs to be practiced everyday. It's when you face a difficult obstacle that is like a wall you can not climb or breakthrough, but finding a way around it anyways. The motivation is not what's on the otherside of the wall, but the steps on how to get to the otherside of the wall. Seeing others accomplishing these same feats, and being inspired to do the same and not viewing it as a threat.

I can safely say that I have a fixed mindset, but I also practice having a growth mindset. This is like a muscle that needs to be exercised on a consistent basis. If it is not exercised, the less one will be able to benefit in the successes in life. It's ok to fail, but don't quit. Keep moving forward.

### This is how I will keep myself in a growth mindset

- Talk through the steps of an obstacle, out loud. Write down clues as they materialize.
- Recognizing that I am getting stuck or hitting a roadblock, then stand up, put down the project that is sucking the rhythm out, walk away, and return when I'm feeling more inspired.
- This should lead to more successes of getting back at it to do one more thing, then another, and before I realize it, I've got my groove back.

---

### Summary

Consciously stopping and thinking about the growth mindset when effort is being required/asked of. No pain, no gain is true. I do a physical work out every day to remind my mind of this saying. I have to push through mentally to either get out of bed, do an extra rep, or an extra lap. This is to remind my brain, outside of working out, that I can put in the extra effort at work, and with family and friends as well.

[Matt Rangel][2]

[2]: https://github.com/rangelMatt "Matt's GitHub"

> `When you want something, all the universe conspires in helping you to achieve it.` — [The Alchemist][1] by Paulo Coelho

[1]: https://g.co/kgs/Tz6J9W "The Universe Conspires"

Please click [here][2] for my Main GitHub Page.
