# The core skills of a project manager

- Enabling decision making
- Communicating and escalating
- Flexibility
- Strong organizational skills

## Enabling decision making

The ability to enable decision-making on the team, or gathering decisions from the appropriate leader, is crucial to keep objects on task and achieve their goals. Lot's of day to day decisions within a project will likely fall to you and your teammates to discuss and agree on. Be sure that projects stay on schedule by gathering information from teammates and using those insights to help the team make informed decisions. Equally important is to make sure those decisions are communicated to the necessary coworkers, whether that's the immediate team or company leaders.

## Communicating and escalating

As a project manager one will use the communication skills in just about everything one does. This can look like documenting plans, sending emails about the status of the project, or holding a meeting to escalate risks or issues to stakeholders.

## Flexibility

Knowing how to be flexible when changes are needed is key. Plans will change, even with careful upfront planning. A good project manager knows that unpredictable moments like these are almost always guaranteed.

## Strong organizational skills

Having strong organizational skills means having the ability to organize these processes and the core elements of a project to ensure nothing gets lost or overlooked, which can and does happen. A good way to prevent this, track daily tasks in a spreadsheet or send frequent status updates or reminders.

Knowledge of helpful tools and templates and familiarity with popular project management styles like Waterfall and Agile, can help PMs keep organize and document the project throughout its lifecycle.

# Key competencies: Flexibility and handling ambiguity

## Enabling decision-making

Start the project by making the decision-making process collaborative, this will make team members feel empowered right away.

The project manager may have an idea of how you would like certain tasks to be accomplished, but the team members may have more creative or efficient approaches. Empowering the team to express their opinions and make their own decisions allows you to focus on the overarching management tasks and prioritize them in order of importance.

## Communicating and escalating

Knowing how to effectively communicate and when to escalate issues to management is key to keeping the PM, the team, and the organization on the path to success. When escalation is required, approach management with both the problem and the potential solution or suggestions. This will show that you're taking initiative as a PM.

## Strong organizational skills

Once you demonstrate that staying organized through efficient tracking and communications, the team will follow suit. This can be executed by:

- Planning and scheduling software (templates, workflows, calendars)
- Collaboration tools (email, collaboration software, dashboards)
- Documentation (files, plans, spreadsheets)
- Quality assurance tools (evaluations, productivity trackers, reports)

Experimenting with different organizational approaches to determine what works best for the PM and team.

## Flexibility

### Flexible planning

Change is inevitable, and the more flexible you are as a project manager, the more successful you will be throughout your career. These flexible planning strategies can help manage the project during times of unpredictability:

- **Assess external constraints**. When planning the project, take external events into account, such as national holidays and team members vacations and sick leave. Leaving extra time in the schedule for these inevitable events up front can help minimize the impact to your project.
- **Plan for risks and challenges**. When considering the risks that may occur, you may be able to find solutions for them in advance. If someone is sick or quits, can they be replaced within the company? Hire an independent contractor? Have a list of people who may be able to join the team if one of the team members becomes unavailable. Also, assess ricks by looking at historical data. Review past project and examine the challenges faced. Evaluate if similar challenges could occur in this project and prepare accordingly.
- **Calculate "float" in the schedule**. Float, or slack, refers to the amount of time you can wait to begin a task before it impacts the project schedule and threatens the project outcome. Identifying float in your schedule can help with resource management, scheduling, and keeping your project on track.

### Handling ambiguity

Project managers often face ambiguity in goals, requirements, schedules, vision, or other areas related to the project. The team will look to the OM to lead during times of ambiguity and change, and flexibility is especially important during these instances.

- **Keep calm**. Handling ambiguity with grace and poise will help inspire the members of your team to do the same.
- **Express empathy**. As a PM, it is important to try to understand what your team is thinking and feeling, especially during times of ambiguity. Let the team members know that you care about the challenges they are facing and are there to support them.
- **Communicate what you know clearly**. Define the aspects of the project that are confirmed and will not change. This helps your team get a better sense of what to expect, regardless of any aspects of the project that are still unknown or changing.
- **Make decisions and stick to them**. Try not to second-guess your decisions in front of your team since this can lead to greater uncertainty. If you need to change course, clearly explain why you have chosen to do so to your team.
- **Trust the expertise of the team**. Increase clarity by having everyone on your team discuss what they already know or believe to be true about components of your project, such as what is involved in specific tasks or resources needed, based on their areas of expertise. Then, discuss what you still don't know and brainstorm way to gather more information.

## Flexibility and handling ambiguity Key takeaway

Having flexibility and ability to handle ambiguity in a rapidly-changing business setting gives your on advantage. Mastering these competencies, along with enabling decision-making, effective communication skills, and strong organizational skills, will allow you to innovate and grow as a project manager and leader.

<div align="center">
`A bar was a room full of tables and chairs and some beer, and a meeting room was the same, a room full of tables and chairs. People come into a bar like they come into a meeting room wanting to leave feeling something else.`
</div>
<div align="right">
~ Rachel, Senior Program Manager in Google, New York ~
</div>

# Common myths about project managers

**Myth: You have to be an expert in the field and have a lot of technical knowledge about the project**

**Reality**: Rather than getting caught up in the technical details when communicating with management and stakeholders, the project manager can look at all the different pieces that the cross-functional team is working on and assess how they each contribute to the success of the project. The project manager job i to handle the communication, documentation, and organization necessary to get the project successfully to the finish line.

**Myth: Only people with a lot of experience within an organization can manage projects successfully.**

**Reality**: In order to successfully manage projects in any organization, you must acquire the necessary skills, knowledge, tools, and techniques and be able to apply them.

**Myth: You have to know every single detail about the project at all times.**

**Reality**: Details matter in project execution, but as a project manager, you must also focus on the big picture and strategy for the project.

- What is the end goal?
- Do you and your team have a clear direction?

If the whole team understands their objectives and has what they need to be successful in their tasks, they can work on eht individual details and provide you space to supervise the overall project goals. Open lines of communication will help ensure that your team members share any possible risks to the budget or schedule with you.

# Leadership and team dynamics

Using your interpersonal skills is key to building relationships with the people involved in your project.

> **Influencing without authority** > <br> A project manager's ability to guide teammates to complete their assigned work <u>without</u> acting as their direct managers.

## Key interpersonal skills

- Communication
- Negotiation
- Conflict mediation
- Understanding motivations

### Communication

Communication can include checking with teammates to understand how they're progressing on a task and providing clear feedback on the quality of a teammate's work.

### Negotiation

Negotiation might include working with a teammate to compromise on a new deadline when they tell you that they won't be able to complete their work on time. This will be important to use these skills with your teammates and stakeholders to balance their needs and what is best for the project.

### Conflict Mediation

Conflict Mediation is a great skill to practice and develop to ensure the project does not suffer as a result. This could involve setting up a meeting with two teammates who are struggling to agree upon th best way to handle a shared task.

### Understanding Motivation

Understanding motivations might also include learning how your teammates prefer to receive feedback, and how they like to receive recognition for doing a great job.
Use individualized information to motivate and encourage each person on your team.

## Traits of a successful project manager

> "...a successful project manager is somebody who really knows how to pull together a group of people."

There's two parts of a successful project manager, one laser focused project manager to reach the end of the goal. The next is the people.

[<---BACK](../googlePmCert.md)
