# Understanding risk management

## The importance of risk management

Think about a time in your life when you managed a project. Maybe it was a professional project, like creating an employee schedule, or a personal project, like planning a family celebration. Now ask yourself this: Did everything go according to plan? If I had to guess, I would bet there was at least one hurdle you ad to deal with. That's because no project goes 100% according to plan, even when they're run by the most experienced project managers. Maybe you planned that employee schedule perfectly, and then someone caught a cold, focrcing you to rearrange the schedule at the last minute. Or maybe just as family members started arriving for that celebration, you realized you forgot to buy ice to keep the drinks cold. Hey, these things happen.

As mentioned before, flexibility is an important skill for managing project. Due to the nature of the project and really life in general, it's also important that you identify and plan for risks that could impact your project. Let's discuss what a risk actually is. A risk is a potential event which can occur and can impact your project. When you think about risk in the context of project management, you will think about them as hypothetical. In other words, these aren't events that will definitely happen, but because there's a possiblity that they could happen, it's your responsibility as the project manager to identify and plan for those risks.

Next, let's discuss issues. An issue is a known or real problem that can affect the ability to complete a task. What's

[<---Back](../README.md)
