googlePmCert/googlePmCert.md, before:

# Google Project Management Cert. Course

![texture](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1470790376778-a9fbc86d70e2?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&auto=format&fit=crop&w=808&q=80)

The Google Project Management Certification Course is a comprehensive program designed to equip aspiring project managers with the skills and knowledge needed to succeed in the fast-paced world of project management. Whether you're just starting out in your career or looking to up skill, this course is the perfect way to gain a solid foundation in project management principles and techniques.

For myself, I am using this to sharpen the skills and knowledge that I already have. This is a great asset to improve on project planning, execution, monitoring, and closing. This course provides access to a range of practical tools and resources, including case studies, templates, and best practices, to help you apply what you've learned to real-world scenarios.

By the end of the program, you'll have a thorough understanding of the key concepts and methodologies used in project management, as well as the ability to lead and manage successful projects from start to finish. Plus, with a certification from Google, you'll have the credentials to demonstrate your expertise to potential employers and advance your career in the field.

Overall, the Google Project Management Certification Course is an engaging, accessible, and highly valuable program that can help you achieve your career goals and become a successful project manager.

- [Week 1: Careers](./Week_1/pmCareers.md)
- [Week 2: Becoming an effective Project Manager](./Week_2/effectivePM.md)

[<---Back](../README.md)

Commit message:

completed week 2 and added linkedin post

googlePmCert/googlePmCert.md, after:

# Google Project Management Cert. Course

![texture](https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1470790376778-a9fbc86d70e2?ixlib=rb-4.0.3&ixid=MnwxMjA3fDB8MHxwaG90by1wYWdlfHx8fGVufDB8fHx8&auto=format&fit=crop&w=808&q=80)

The Google Project Management Certification Course is a comprehensive program designed to equip aspiring project managers with the skills and knowledge needed to succeed in the fast-paced world of project management. Whether you're just starting out in your career or looking to up skill, this course is the perfect way to gain a solid foundation in project management principles and techniques.

For myself, I am using this to sharpen the skills and knowledge that I already have. This is a great asset to improve on project planning, execution, monitoring, and closing. This course provides access to a range of practical tools and resources, including case studies, templates, and best practices, to help you apply what you've learned to real-world scenarios.

By the end of the program, you'll have a thorough understanding of the key concepts and methodologies used in project management, as well as the ability to lead and manage successful projects from start to finish. Plus, with a certification from Google, you'll have the credentials to demonstrate your expertise to potential employers and advance your career in the field.

Overall, the Google Project Management Certification Course is an engaging, accessible, and highly valuable program that can help you achieve your career goals and become a successful project manager.

- [Week 1: Careers](./Week_1/pmCareers.md)
- [Week 2: Becoming an effective Project Manager](./Week_2/effectivePM.md)
- [Week 2.2: Learning more about PM Roles and Responsibilities](./Week_2/2.2effective.md)
- [Week 2.3: Acquiring the core skills of a successful project manager](./Week_2/2.3core.md)

[<---Back](../README.md)
