# Building a project plan

## Components of a project plan

A project plan can be useful for any project, big or small, since it helps you document the scope, tasks, milestones, and overall activities of the project. At the center of the project plan is the project schedule. The project schedule can help you estimate the amount of time it'll take to complete the project, and it can provide the team with a way to track the project's progress against your goals.

What goes into a project plan may vary from company to company, but most plans contain these five basic elements. There are: tasks, milestones, people, documentation, and time. Let's break those done.

> ### Components of a project plan
>
> - Tasks
> - Milestones
> - People
> - Documentation
> - Time

A project plan will include tasks and milestones, two topics we discussed before. Tasks are activities that need to be accomplished within a set period of time. They're assigned to different members of the team according to their roles and skills. And milestones are important points within the schedule that indicate progress. They usually signify the completion of a deliverable or phase of the project.

A project plan will also include the people working on your team and their roles. It's important that each team member understands their role and the tasks they're responsible for completing. Ensuring that everyone is clear on their assigned tasks frees you up to focus on managing the project and creates a sense of personal responsibility for members of the team. A project plan is a good place to link to relevant documentation. This includes documents like your RACI chart, which helps to define roles and responsibilities for individuals on your team. you can also link to your charter, which clearly defines the project and outlines the details needed to reach your goals. Relevant documentation can also include documents like your budget and risk management plan. We'll discuss more about those later on in the course. Lastly, a project plan should include the estimated time that will be spent on the project. This forms the basis of the schedule, which is the anchor of your project plan.

The estimated time include dates on which tasks should be started and completed and the dates when you hope to reach various milestones. It also includes the start and end dates of the project, which are important in determining which resource you'll need and when you'll need them.

## Putting together the pieces of a project plan

Every project plan is a living artifact that serves as your team's roadmap throughout the project. We have covered some common elements of project plans, including tasks, milestones, people, documentation, and time. Let's look at how these elements intersect with other important components to create a comprehensive plan for your project.

### How project plan components are connected

The center of the project plan is the project schedule, which helps you estimate the amount of time it will take to complete the project and provides the team with a way to track the project's progress against your goals. In addition to the schedule, you should also include the following components in your project plan:

- Scope and goals
- Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
- Budget
- Management Plans

### Project scope and goals

Both the project scope and goals will be captured initially in your **project charter**, the document that clearly defines the key details of your project. You can link your project charter in your project plan. Having details about the project's scope and goals easily accessible can help remind your team of the objectives they are trying to accomplish and if anything is asked of them that goes beyond what was initially agreed upon in order to achieve those objectives.

### Work Breakdown Structure(WBS)

As a reminder, a **Work Breakdown Structure** is a tool that sorts the milestones and tasks of a project in a hierarchy, in the order they need to be completed. The WBS is key to your project plan since it breaks the work down into more manageable pieces. In your project plan, the tasks should be visible in one place with clear descriptions, owners, and due dates. This will allow you and your team to understand who is responsible for which tasks and when each task is supposed to be completed. Your project plan should also contain detailed milestones and statuses related to these tasks, which will help you and your team members visualize project progress.

In addition to the WBS, further documentation-such as a RACI chart-will help define roles and responsibilities and would be useful to add to your project plan. Keeping this documentation stored or linked in one place is a best practice for transparency and effective communication.

### Budget

Throughout the life cycle of your project, the budget will need to be managed and monitored. The project budget is often linked to the project plan because it is heavily dependent on key elements of the project. Linking these components allows for smoother management and visibility.

Depending on the size of your project and your organization, you may not be the primary person responsible for managing the project budget. For instance, if your project is at a large organization and the funds are managed by another department, you may not have as much autonomy or insight into all of the budget elements. As a result, you may not be able to monitor the budget closely. If someone in another department is managing the budget, make sure to have regular check-ins with them to ensure that you are aware of how you are tracking.

### Management plans

Management plans-such as the change management plan, risk management plan, and communication plan-are all integral to keeping a project organized and on track and should be linked in your project plan. These plans will be discussed in detail in the coming lessons of this course.

### Key takeaway: Putting together the pieces of a project plan

Project scope and goals, the Work Breakdown Structure(WBS), the budget, and management plans are all important components of your project plan. They help define how basic project plan elements-including tasks, milestones, people, documentation, and time-will be structured and utilized in your project. However, no one project plan will be the same.

## Making realistic time estimates

As the project manager, you aren't responsible for completing every task. What you are responsible for is identifying and helping assign those tasks, and then estimating how long they'll take to complete. These estimates come together to determine the overall project schedule. So, how do you estimate the amount of time a given task will take? You do this with the help of your team.

> ### Time estimation
>
> A prediction of the total amount of time required to complete a task
>
> ### Effort estimation
>
> A prediction of the amount and difficulty of active work required to complete a task

Time estimation is a prediction of the total amount of time required to complete a task. Effort estimation is a prediction of the amount and difficulty of active work required to complete a task. Effort estimation differs from time estimation in that effort quantifies the amount of time it will take a person to complete work on a task. On the flip side, time refers to the overall duration of the task from start to finish. That include inactive time. Here's an example.

The effort estimation for painting a wall might be 30 minutes, but time estimation might be 24 hours. That's because in addition to the 30 minutes of active painting time, there are also 23 and a half hours of inactive drying time. It's important to understand the difference between time estimation and effort estimation, because it can help you be more efficient with your available resources. If there's idle time baked into a given task, your teammate is effectively free to do other things. A painter can do other tasks while the wall is drying ,like painting the mailbox or the window trim.

> ### Unrealistic effort estimates happen when you've underestimated the amount of time it'll take to complete a task

An unrealistic effort estimate can negatively impact a project schedule. Generally, this happens when you underestimate the amount of time it will take to complete a task. Often, the culprit for under estimating effort is optimism. And listen, optimism is a wonderful trait for a project manager to possess.

> ### Too much optimism can lead you to overlook potential risks that could set your plans behind schedule

But too much optimism can lead you to overlook potential risks that could set your plans behind schedule. Though it might be tempting to make the optimistic assumption that tasks will be executed exactly according to plan, there is always a possibility that there will be setbacks. So, how do you try to avoid making unrealistic effort estimates? You can do this by communicating with teammates assigned to each task.

> ### Your teammates will have the most realistic understanding of the amount of work required to complete a task, and will be able to provide you with the best estimate

Your teammates will have the most realistic understanding of the amount of work required to complete a task and should be able to provide you with the best estimate. Let's imagine this scenario in the context of your Plant Pals project at Office Green.

As a reminder, you're launching a new service to provide top office green customers with small, low-maintenance plants that they can place on their desks. You might assume that creating a contact list of top customers is relatively straightforward and can be completed ina single day. But it's important to really consider certain sub-tasks required to complete work in your planning.

> ### Sub-tasks
>
> Smaller tasks that are required to complete a larger task

Sub-tasks refer to smaller tasks that are required to complete a larger task. For example, this might include meeting with the global sales team to identify clients gathering contact information, determining client language preferences, and building a spreadsheet to house this information.

> ### Asking the teammate assigned to the task for their estimate is likely to yield a more accurate estimation

Asking the teammate assigned to the task for their estimate is likely to yield a more accurate estimation since they'll have a deeper understanding of the work and the nuances of what's required to complete the task. you might learn that creating the contact list may take two days to complete, which could be double the time you originally expected. Of course, you can usually ask follow-up questions, or even gently push back on their estimate, as needed. Later on, we'll discuss more of the techniques you can use to get more accurate estimates from your teammates.

Now, even though task owners tend to have the strongest sense of how much time they'll need to complete a task, the fact is that effort estimates are just that, estimates, meaning that sometimes those estimates won't be accurate. For example, in our Plants Pals scenario, your teammate estimates that it will take two days to create a contact list of top customers. But, let's say that the Sales team is out of the office for a team-building exercise and unable to meet about the client list until after the weekend. This will create a task delay, and as a result, the original estimate is no longer accurate. Luckily, there's a helpful tool called a buffer that you can use during the planning phase to protect against inaccurate effort estimate.

> ### Buffer
>
> Extra time added to the end of a task or project to account for unexpected slowdowns or delays in work progress

A buffer is extra time added to the end of a task or a project to account fo unexpected slowdowns or delays in work progress. Buffers are important because they can provide some leeway, just in case your time and effort estimates turn out to fall a bit short. With a buffer, you can add extra time into schedule, and your project shouldn't fall of track when task delays inevitably arise.

> ### Types of scheduling buffers
>
> - Task buffers
>   - Extra time tacked on to a specific task
>   - Should be used primarily for tasks that are out of the project team's control
>   - Should be used more sparingly for tasks within the project team's control
>   - Adding a buffer to every project task could lengthen your project schedule unnecessarily
> - Project buffers
>   - Extra time tacked onto the end of a project

There are two types of buffers you can use when planning your schedule: task buggers and project buffers. First, we have task buffers, which refer to extra time tacked on to a specific task. Task buffers should be used primarily for tasks that are out of the project team's control. For example, you might ask a potential plant vendor to provide you with a cost estimate by Monday. You might assign them this deadline, knowing that you won't actually need the estimate until Thursday. The time between Monday and Thursday is your buffer, and it provides your team with extra time just in case the vendor sends their estimates to you a day or two late. Task buffers should be used more sparingly for tasks within the project team's control. For example, you might choose to add buffers only to tasks that are difficult to complete or that have an element of unpredictability, like the length of time it will take plants to grow.

Adding a buffer to every task could lengthen your project unnecessarily, leaving you, your team, and your stakeholders with an unrealistic timeline. This is where project buffers come in handy. Project buffers differ from task buffers in that they provide extra time to the overall project schedule. Rather than adding a buffer to every task, you can add extra time to the overall project schedule. Rather than adding a buffer to every task, you can add extra time as a buffer towards the end of your project schedule. Then you can use that extra time, two to three days, for example, as needed throughout the project. For instance, if a teammate misses a deadline here and there, the project buffer gives you space in the overall schedule to make up for lost time. Time estimation, effort estimation, and buffers can help you build realistic plans for reaching the project goal.

## Case Study: Run fast, pay later

**Time estimation** is used to predict the amount of time that will be required to complete a task. We have talked about how a central part of being a project manager involves planning. Carefully performing key steps of your planning process, such as time estimation, can have a big impact on the success of your project. Conversely, flawed time estimation is the root cause of many failed projects. That means many projects fail because project managers and teams fail to accurately estimate the time that it will take to complete tasks.

#### Run fast, pay later: A case study on time estimation

Kendra just scored a project manager role on a new project. It was a highly competitive bid, and the company and Kendra a eager to do a great job. Kendra realized immediately that the timeline for the project would be almost impossible to execute. However, this was the first big project she was asked to manage. Therefore, instead of letting management know about the project's impossible timeline, Kendra kept quiet and was determined to make it work. She rushed through the planning phase to get the team moving since time was ticking towards the project completion date. Kendra created all of the planning documents without input from her team or other stakeholders, with the sole intention of reach the deadline.

During the team meeting, Kendra presenter her project plan to the team. Right away, team members expressed their concerns with the timeline. They felt like there wasn't enough time to complete their work, and they worried that the timeline didn't incorporate enough time for reviews. Kendra documented the team's concerns, but instructed them to simply work faster and make it happen.

As the project went on, the project faced schedule delays an other issues due to rework, previously unaccounted for tasks, stressed team members, and concerned stakeholders. Ultimately, the project missed its deadline. Later, the company did a retrospective to determine where things went wrong, and Kendra learned a lot of important lessons.

### Analysis of the case study

Let's break down the project planning process Kendra took and identify any missteps and corrective actions that would have helped set her team up for success.

#### **Escalating concerns**

Kendra sensed the project timeline was problematic right form the start of the project. Instead of gathering information about to support her concerns and sharing it with management, she decided to keep the issue to herself. She moved faster towards the goal instead of slowing down and planning the project thoroughly.

#### **Working carefully**

If Kendra had taken the time to work carefully through the planning process, she may have been able to build a more realistic project plan to deliver the best product to the customer. She might also have identified potential time-saving activities that could have helped her team meet the project deadline. Thorough and careful planning with her team could have helped Kendra identify problems and solutions in advance, such as:

- **Elimination of tasks.** It is possible that all of the tasks initially listed didn't need to be completed. There may have been unnecessary work added in, and the team could have completed the project without it.
- **Increased team size.** Kendra could have addressed the potential schedule risk by requesting more resources early on in the project rather than trying to execute without the necessary resources.
- **Streamlining of activities.** There may have been some tasks that could have been done in parallel, or at least not in sequential order.

#### **Gathering input from the team**

Kendra should have brought together team members, peers, and management to help build and review her project plan, especially given the challenges of meeting the proposed project timeline. Kendra also didn't take action to address the concerns of the team members who were responsible for completing the tasks within the estimated time.

In this case study, the project manager faced the repercussions of careless time estimates that result in rework and unplanned work. Most times, you can take a pain point in a project-like concerns about timelines-and turn it into an opportunity to be flexible and modify the plan to steer the project ina better direction.

### Key takeaway: Case study: Run fast, pay later

Be realistic when estimating time and effort for a project. Take the time to carefully evaluate potential risks and the impact on the work, and talk to your team members about these challenges. Don't be afraid to escalate potential concerns to management. Optimism is a trait of a great project manager and leader, but it can adversely affect your project when it comes to time estimation.

## Overcoming the planning fallacy

It is human nature to underestimate the amount of time and effort it takes to complete a task-from anything as simple as walking the dog to something as complex as completing a project. People generally want to remain hopeful about a positive outcome, and this is a great quality to have as a person. But as a project manager, this kind of optimism can also be a deficiency, especially during the planning phase of a project. Let's examine a theory known as the **planning fallacy** to better understand how to set yourself up for success in the planning phase.

### The planning fallacy and optimism bias

The idea of the planning fallacy was first introduced in a 1977 paper written by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, two foundational figures in the field of behavioral economics. The planning fallacy describes our tendency to underestimate the amount of time it will take to complete a task, as well as the costs and risks associated with that task. due to **optimism bias.** Optimism bias is when a person believes that they are less likely to experience a negative event. For example, when you are planning to walk your dog in between meetings, you might think that you can do it faster than you actually can. Optimism bias is what tells you that you are going to be able to walk your dog without being late for your next meeting. If you don't consider things that might affect the time it will take you to walk your dog-the weather, the chance of them running into another dog wanting to play, or the fact that they frequently get distracted while sniffing around-you might be late for your next meeting, or miss it altogether!

The planning fallacy can happen to anyone, regardless of whether or not they have experience completing similar tasks. Whether this is your first time walking your dog or your hundredth, you still have to consider the different factors that can affect how long it will take you to complete the walk. This same principle applies in project management. You may be brand new to this kind of project or you may have managed tons of similar projects before; either way, you still need to be careful not to underestimate the time it will take to complete each task on this particular project. As a project manager, you should aim to balance being aware of the planning fallacy with keeping an optimistic attitude about the project, even as things change. Be optimistically realistic: Push for the best outcomes while planning for the proper time it may take to accomplish each task.

### Key takeaways: Overcoming the planning fallacy

Being on the lookout for "what-ifs" is a key project management skill. Considering situations that could affect whether or not the project is completed on time can help you overcome the planning fallacy. Also, you will always have a project team in your corner, so make sure you use them as resources to help uncover possible risks. Remember to be "optimistically realistic" and push for the best outcome while still planning for the proper time to accomplish each task.

## Creating a critical path

The **critical path** refers to the list of required project milestones you must reach to complete the project schedule, as well as the mandatory tasks that contribute to the completion of each milestone. You can think of the critical path as a framework that tells you, the project manager, where you are, where you are headed, and when you will get there.

### **Why the critical path is critical**

The critical path helps you determine the essential tasks that need to be completed on your project to meet your end goal and how long each task will take. The critical path also provides a quick path also provides a quick reference for critical tasks by revealing which tasks will impact your project completion date negatively if their scheduled finish dates are late or missed. A critical path can help you define the resources you need, you project baselines, and any flexibility you have in the schedule.

### **How to create a critical path**

Each project you work on will be different, but there are some general steps for creating a critical path that are applicable to most projects.

#### **Step 1: Capture all tasks**

When you first start working on your project schedule, you will capture all of the tasks associated with the completion of the effort. Remember to use the key planning documents you have created to get you to this point, such as your **work breakdown structure (WBS)**. The main goal in this step is to make sure that you aren't missing a key piece of work that is required to complete your project. When creating a critical path, focus on the essential, "need to do" tasks, rather than the "nice to do" tasks that aren't essential for the completion of the project. Here is an example of critical tasks for building the structure of a house:

| **Task**                                             |
| ---------------------------------------------------- |
| A) Excavation                                        |
| B) Foundation                                        |
| C) Framing                                           |
| D) Roof                                              |
| E) Plumbing                                          |
| F) Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) |
| G) Electrical                                        |
| H) Insulation                                        |
| I) Drywall + Paint                                   |
| J) Flooring                                          |

#### **Step 2: Set dependencies**

Now that you have captured all of your critical tasks in list form, arrange those tasks in order of completion by identifying dependencies. To determine **dependencies,** figure out which tasks must be completed before other tasks can start. For example, you can't paint the outside of a house before the house is built, so the task of framing the walls must come before the task of painting them. Identifying dependencies is key to a successful project schedule.

To figure out dependencies for each task, ask:

- Which task needs to take place before this task?
- Which task can be finished at the same time as this task?
- Which task needs to happen right after this task?

Once you have answered these questions, you can list these dependencies next to your list of tasks:

| **Task**                                             | **Dependency**                      |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| A) Excavation                                        |                                     |
| B) Foundation                                        | A) Excavation                       |
| C) Framing                                           | B) Foundation                       |
| D) Roof                                              | C) Framing                          |
| E) Plumbing                                          | C) Framing                          |
| F) Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) | C) Framing                          |
| G) Electrical                                        | C) Framing                          |
| H) Insulation                                        | E) Plumbing, F) HVAC, G) Electrical |
| I) Drywall + Paint                                   | H) Insulation                       |
| J) Flooring                                          | I) Drywall + Paint                  |

#### **Step 3: Create a network diagram**

One common way to visualize the critical path is by creating a **network diagram.** Network diagrams, like the example below, sequence tasks in the order in which they need to be completed, based on their dependencies. These diagrams help visualize:

- The path of the work from the start of the project (excavation) to the end of the project (flooring)
- Which tasks can be performed in parallel (e.g., HVAC and plumbing) and in sequence (e.g., plumbing then insulation)
- Which non-essential tasks are NOT on the critical path

#### **Step 4: Make time estimates**

After determining tasks and dependencies, consult key stakeholders to get accurate time estimates for each task. This is a crucial step in determining your critical path. If your time estimates are significantly off, it may cause the length of your critical path to change. Time estimates can be reviewed and updated throughout the project, as necessary.

| **Task**                                             | **Duration** | **Dependency**                      |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------ | ----------------------------------- |
| A) Excavation                                        | 1 Day        |                                     |
| B) Foundation                                        | 3 Days       | A) Excavation                       |
| C) Framing                                           | 15 Days      | B) Foundation                       |
| D) Roof                                              | 3 Days       | C) Framing                          |
| E) Plumbing                                          | 4 Days       | C) Framing                          |
| F) Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) | 3 Days       | C) Framing                          |
| G) Electrical                                        | 3 Days       | C) Framing                          |
| H) Insulation                                        | 2 Days       | E) Plumbing, F) HVAC, G) Electrical |
| I) Drywall + Paint                                   | 15 Days      | H) Insulation                       |
| J) Flooring                                          | 7 Days       | I) Drywall + Paint                  |

#### **Step 5: Find the critical path**

Now that you have your estimated durations for each task, add that information to your network diagram:

If you add up the durations for all of your "essential" tasks and calculate the longest possible path, you can determine your critical path. In your calculation, only include the tasks that, if they go unfinished, will impact the project's finish date. In this example, if the "non-essential" tasks-like landscaping and driveway pavement-are not completed, the house structure completion date will not be impacted.

You can also calculate the critical path using two common approaches: the **forward pass** and the **backward pass.** These techniques are useful if you are asked to identify the **earliest and latest start dates** (the earliest and latest dates on which you can begin working on a task) or the **slack** (the amount of time that task can be delayed past its earliest start date with delaying the project).

- The **forward pass** refers to when you start at the beginning of your project task list and add up the duration of the tasks on the critical path to the end of your project. When using this approach, start with the first task you have identified that needs to be completed before anything else can start.
- The **backward pass** is the opposite-start with the final task or milestone and move backwards through your schedule to determine the shortest path to completion. When there is a hard deadline, working backwards can help you determining which tasks are actually critical. You may be able to cut some tasks-or complete them later-in order to meet your deadline.

You can read more about each of these concepts and critical path calculation methods in the following articles:

- [How to Use the Critical Path Method for Complete Beginners](https://www.workamajig.com/blog/critical-path-method)
- [Critical Path Method: A Project Management Essential](https://www.wrike.com/blog/critical-path-is-easy-as-123/)

## Getting accurate time estimates from your team

### Soft skills for accurate estimation

- Asking the right questions
  - Ask open-ended questions to get a time estimate

> #### **Open-ended questions**
>
> - How long does it typically take you to mock-up a website design like this one?
> - How complex is this task?
> - What are the risks associated with this task?
> - When do you think you could have this ready?

- Negotiating effectively

Part of your job as the project manager is to bridge the gap between high-level goals of the project and the day-to-day perspective of your team. While your project might be your number one priority, it's possible that people on your project team have competing priorities on other teams to keep track of, as well. Negotiating effectively can help you influence a team member to make your project their priority, by collaborating to find an outcome that works for everyone.

For example, let's imagine that the website designer estimates it will take them two weeks to mock up the website design for review. But perhaps you were hoping that the estimate might be closer to one week. To arrive at an estimate that works for both you and the designer, you might gently challenge the estimate by asking follow-up questions. Perhaps you'd ask if their estimate includes mocking up designs for multiple pages. If so, you might ask if the designer is able to share one or two pages with you sooner than their proposed deadline.

By asking questions, you can determine if their estimate is flexible, or if you need to bring in an additional designer to support the schedule. By negotiating effectively with your teammates, you can create a sense of shared ownership over the project outcomes and create a schedule that aligns with everyone's workload.

- Practicing empathy

> #### **Empathy**
>
> A person's ability to relate to the thoughts and feelings of others

Practicing empathy at work can be a very effective way to build trust with your team. Your teammates are humans, and each person can only do so much. When you're discussing estimates with the team, you might practice empathy by asking each person about their workload, including work outside of your project and the overall work-life balance. You might also ask if they've scheduled vacation or leave during the duration of the project, or if there are crucial holidays in which they won't be working. This can help you avoid assigning tasks when teammates are unable to complete them on time.

For example, the web designer might tell you that they're also designing a website for another team at Office Green, and that the timeline for both projects overlap. So, to avoid overloading your designer with work, you might work with the other project manager to balance workloads across teams. People like to feel their work is valued, so part of empathy is remembering to always sbe appreciative of the work, collaboration, and support that you're getting form the team.

## **Angel: The value interpersonal skills in time time estimation**

Ask:

- How much faster could you go if I gave you this?
- What is stopping you from going faster?
- What teams would you need to get involved to help this?
- We have an issue, are there similar issues in other parts of this project, ad do we need to get together ina larger group to bring that together.

[<---Back](../README.md)
