# Code 201 Class 8 Reading Notes

## Learn CSS Layout

### Grid

Grid is designed to control multi-axis layouts instead of single-axis layouts (vertical or horizontal space).

Grid enables you to write ___ rules on an element that has `display: grid`, and introduces a few new primitives for layout styling, such as the `repeat()` and `minmax()` functions. One useful grid unit is the `fr` unit-which is a fraction of remaining space-you can build traditional 12 column grids, with a gap between each item, with 3 CSS properties:

```json
.my-element :first-child {
  grid-row: 1/3;
  grid-column: 1/4;
}
```

## Layout from HTML/CSS Book

### Screen Sizes

> Different visitors to your site will have different sized screens that show different amounts of information, so your design needs to be able to work on a range of different sized screens.

### Screen Resolution

> Resolution refers to the number of dots a screen shows per inch. Some devices have a higher resolution than desktop computers and more operationg systems allow users to adjust the resolution of their screens.

### Page sizes

> Because screen sizes and display resolultions vary so much, web designers often try to create pages of around 960-1000 pixels wide (since most users will be able to see desing sthis wide on their screens).

### Fixed Width Layouts

> Fixed width layout designs do not change size as the user increases or decreases the size of their browser winder. Measurements tend to be given in pixes.

### Liquid Layouts

>Liquid layout designs stretch and contract as the user increases or decreases the size of their browser window. They tend to use percentages.

[<---BACK](README.md)
