# Managing budgeting and procurement

## Understanding project budgets

Topics include:

- How to create and manage a real-world project budget
- Discuss the components of a budget and how stakeholders play a role in the budgeting process
- Learn about the importance of procurement in project management
- Learn about vendor management and procurement in Agile and traditional methodology settings

New concepts:

- Introduce legal and contractual documentation
  - NDA, RFP, SoW, PM, SME, KPI, EV
- Understand the role of legal teams and ethics in procurement

## The importance of budget setting

Project budgeting is a lot like personal budgeting, except a little more complex.

> ### Project budget
>
> The estimated monetary resources needed to achieve the project's goals and objectives

When reviewing a project budget, you need to consider all of the potential and projected costs needed to complete the project.

> ### Milestone
>
> An important point within the project schedule that indicates progress and usually signifies the completion of a deliverable or phase of the project

Break the budget down by milestones, which are important points within the project that indicate progress and usually signifies the completion of a deliverable or phase of the project, and list activities and tasks alongside their associated costs.

> ### Forecast
>
> A cost estimate, or prediction over a period of time

This ensures that you calculate the correct expenses for a particular period of time. This is considered a forecast. A forecast for your project budget is a cost estimate or a prediction over a period of time. You'll frequently review your project budget and it will evolve throughout the project life cycle. These budgets usually contain items such as labor, operating costs and costs associated with obtaining necessary materials like hardware, software, or equipment. The importance of a project budget focuses on more than just saving money. In project management, a budget is considered a deliverable. It is a success metric. the project budget is a tool to communicate exactly what is needed and when it is needed with stakeholders.

> Budget creation takes place in the initiation phase of your project

The budget will have a direct effect on the company's financial viability. So, as you can probably tell by now, it's an integral part of project management. Budget creation takes place in the initiation phase of your project. Keep in mind that the budget will be adjusted as needed throughout the lifecycle of the project. Depending on your role in the company, you won't always be the sole creator of the budget.

Your ownership over things like budget and vendor relationship may vary depending on factors such as size of the company or support team or the team organizational chart. Although you may not always manage the budget from start to finish, budget and milestones go hand in hand. So it's important for you to know the ins and outs of the budget throughout the project. As a project manager, you may be tasked with obtaining approvals for spending. Most companies have a signing or spending policy. This usually outlines who has the authority to commit resources or incur costs or other obligations on behalf of the company.

This is important because you won't be able to continue with some of your deliverables or action items, if you don't know how much certain activities will cost, and whether you have the necessary funds available. It wouldn't make any sense to rent a property without checking on the rental cost first, right? That's especially true if the rental price is higher than your budget. The same thinking is applicable for your project budgeting.

> The budgeting process usually happens in conjunction with the scheduling process

The budgeting process usually happens in conjunction with the scheduling process because the steps of the scheduling process are highly dependent on the costs. The project manager will collaborate with people on the project to create their estimations. For the most part, after the cost estimating process has been completed, it's common for the project sponsor or another key stakeholder to review and approve estimation costs, and if necessary adjust and reallocate funds for the project. This could mean that either the CEO or the COO are the ones giving the okay or the final sign-off.

For example, in our Office Green project, the director of product has sign-off approval. As we mentioned before, the project manager will most likely need some kind of sign-off from the finance department. This may very from company to company. So just make sure you're aware of your company's processes. Project budgeting is never a one-size-fits-all operation. As the project manager, you will have to prioritize where you allocate funds within the project to ensure maximum output.

> Most projects are created to:
>
> - Increase workforce productivity
> - Increase revenue
> - Attempt to save costs

Ultimately, most projects are created to improve workforce productivity, increase revenue, or attempt to save costs within an organization. BUdgeting is one of the most important aspects of project management, and when you start, to stay on budget is one of the trickiest tasks. It's important not to go over budget and cost the company extra money, and it's equally important not to be under budget either since that might affect the company's budget for the next year. When it comes to high-profile businesses, such as publicly traded companies like Google, or public sector organizations such as your local education department, they may have a requirement to report on their financial performance to shareholders or auditors. Going to far over or under budget will change the way the company budgets for the next year, potentially leaving you with less money to work with in the future.

> A project manager must show the requested amount of money was used in order to secure enough budget for future projects

In other words, a project manager must show the requested amount of money was used in order to secure enough budget for future projects. For small businesses, there may be a tighter budget, in which case it's especially critical to be careful about spending too much money on a project than initially allocated. It's really helpful to your overall success as a project manager to understand budgeting.

## Key components of a project budget

> ### When creating a budget, a project manager must account for
>
> - Understanding stakeholder needs
> - Budgeting for surprise expenses
> - Maintaining adaptability
> - Reviewing and reforecasting throughout the project

There are so many things to factor into project budgeting. Project managers must account for understanding stakeholder needs, budgeting for surprise expenses, maintaining adaptability, and reviewing and reforecasting throughout the entire project. For example, in Office Green, it's important to know exactly what stakeholders expect from this project in order to deliver. As a company, the ultimate goal is typically to make a profit and to save money and time. The project sponsor-the Director of Product, in this case-needs the project to come in at a certain cost in order to make profit. As the project manager, you will also need to budget for surprise expenses. Let's say several planters arrive from the vendor broken and cracked. Maybe the planter is cracked during delivery process, and it isn't the vendors fault. In that case, you will have to order some additional planters to fulfill orders, and that may be an added cost. As your project continues along, you'll have to review your budget and sometimes reforecast, which means creating a separate revised budget based on how your project is tracking. Keeping on top of the budget will help you stay organized, and reforecasting is a way to recalibrate the budget, if necessary. as the project manager Office Green, you might find that you need to shift costs to different resources and categories within your project budget. Maybe you initially overestimated the cost of plants from the vendor and underestimated the costs of marketing your new launch. You can reallocate these dollars as necessary. That's a great example of how to review and reforecast.

> ### Resource cost rates
>
> The cost of a resource

There are several factors to consider when creating a budget, including resource cost rates, reserve analysis, contingency budget, and cost of quality. You'll need to determine resource cost rates. Resource cost rates are exactly what they sound like, the cost of a resource. Some examples of resources are labor, tools, equipment, materials, and software. You'll want to ask yourself, how much will each of these resources cost the company? Sometimes a project can be derailed because the project manager didn't adequately include funds for reserves or buffers.

> ### Reserve analysis
>
> A method to check for remaining project resources

Performing a reserve analysis will help you account for any bugger funds you may need. A reserve analysis is a method to check for remaining project resources. In performing a reserve analysis, you'll review all potential risks to your project and determine if you need to add buffer funds. These funds are necessary because new costs that you didn't originally foresee will arise.

> ### Contingency budget
>
> Money that is included to cover potentially unforeseen events that aren't accounted for in a cost estimate

This is also known as contingency budget. Contingency budget in the context of project management, is money that is included to cover potentially unforeseen events that aren't accounted for in a cost estimate. The purpose is to compensate for the uncertainty that occurs in cost and time estimates, as well as unpredictable risk exposure.

> ### Cost of quality
>
> Costs that are incurred to prevent issues with products, processes, or tasks
>
> - Prevention costs
> - Appraisal costs
> - Internal failure costs
> - External failure costs

The cost of quality refers to all of the costs that are incurred to prevent issues with products, processes, or tasks. The cost of quality includes prevention costs, appraisal costs, internal failure costs, and external failure costs. Once you've applied these factors, **resources cost rates**, **reserve analysis**, **contingency budget**, and the cost of your quality into your budget, you can estimate what your project might cost. Remember, your budget will most likely change, starting with an initial estimate is one way to ensure that you're at least on track it's okay if your budget does change, that's why we review and reforecast.

## Project budgeting 101

A **project budget** is the estimated monetary resources needed to achieve a project's goals and objectives. In previous lessons, we covered a wide range of information related to project budgets.

Budgets are typically created in the **initiation** and **planning phases** of your project. As with any other project management document, you need to continue to review and control the budget throughout the life cycle of you r project. Your budget is more than just how much it will cost to complete the project-it is a helpful tool to reference when communicating with stakeholders and can double as a tracker for your project's progress. Budgets also help control your costs and act as the baseline for the financial portion of the project.

### **Project budgeting best practices**

Here are a few tips to consider when creating your project budget:

- **Reference historical data:** Your project may be similar to a previous project your organization has worked on. It is important to review how the project's budget was handled, find out what went well, and learn from any previous mistakes.
- **Utilize your team, mentors, or manager:** Get into the habit of asking for your team to double check your work to give you additional sets of eyes on your documents.
- **Time-phase your budget:** Time-phase budgeting allows you to allocate costs for project tasks over the projected timeline in which those expenses are planned to take place. By looking at your tasks against a timeline, you can track and compare planned versus actual costs over time and manage changes to your budget as necessary.
- **Check, check, and double check:** Make sure that your budget is accurate and error-free. Your budget will likely require approval from another department, such as finance a or senior management, so do your best to ensure that it is as straightforward to understand as possible and that ll of your calculations are correct.

### **Categorize different types of costs**

There are different types of costs that your project will incur. For example, you may need to account for both **direct costs** and **indirect costs** in your project budget. Categorize these different types of costs in your budget so that you can ensure you are meeting the requirements of your organization and customer.

#### **Direct costs**

These are costs for items that are necessary in order to complete your project. These costs can include:

- Wages and salaries of employees and contractors
- Materials costs
- Equipment rental costs
- Software licenses
- Project-related travel and transportation costs
- Staff training

#### **Indirect costs**

These are costs for items which do not directly lead to the completion of your project but are still essential for the project team to do their work. They are also referred to as **overhead costs**. These costs can include:

- Administrative costs
- Utilities
- Insurance
- General office equipment
- Security

### **Develop a baseline budget**

A **baseline budget** is an estimate of project costs that you start with at the beginning of your project. Once you have created a budget for your project and gotten it approved, you should publish this baseline and use it to compare against actual performance progress. This will give you insight into how your project budget is doing and allow you to make informed adjustments.

It is important to continually monitor your project budget and make changes if necessary. Be aware that budget updates can require the same approvals as your initial budget. Also, you should "re-baseline" your budget if you make significant changes. Re-baselining refers to when you update or modify a project's baseline as a result of any approved change to the schedule, cost, or deliverable content. For example, if you have a significant change in your project scope, your budget will likely be impacted. In this instance, you would need to re-baseline in order to adhere to a realistic budget.

### **Perform a reserve analysis**

A reserve analysis will help you account for any buffer funds you may need. First, review all potential risks to your project and determine if you need to add buffer funds, also referred to as a contingency budget. These funds are necessary because new costs that you did not expect are likely to happen throughout the project.

You may also want to account for cost of quality in your overall project budget. The cost of quality refers to all of the costs that are incurred to deliver a quality product or service, which can extend beyond material resources. This includes preventing or addressing issues with products, processes, or tasks, & internal and external failure costs. One example would be having to redesign a product or service due to defects. A defect could mean refunds to customers, time and money required to create a new product or service, and multiple other potential costs affecting the client.

### Key takeaways: Project Budgeting 101

Budgeting in the project management world is a complex process involving many different parties and documentation, but following the best practices described in the reading can help break it down. Remember to use historical data nad time-phasing, and reach out to your team for support. Make sure you are capturing all of the components of your budget, including direct and indirect costs. Finally, be sure to baseline your budget so you know where your money is being used and when.

[<---Back](../README.md)
