# Managing budgeting and procurement

## Overcoming budgeting challenges

### Challenge 1: Budget pre-allocation

You may encounter situations where your budget is already set before you even start the project. This is known as **budget pre-allocation**. Some organizations follow strict budgeting cycles, which can lead to cost estimations taking place before the scope of the project is completely defined.

If you are given a pre-allocated budget, it is important to work with your customer to set expectations on scope and deliverables within the allocated budget. To deliver a great product within you allocated budget will require detailed planning.

A pre-allocated budget should also be routinely monitored to ensure the amounts you have budgeted are sufficient to meet your costs. Be sure to carefully track all expenses in your budget. Regularly match these expenses against your pre-allocated budget to ensure you have sufficient funds for the remainder of your project.

Part of that planning includes making sure that you are tracking fixed and time- and materials-based expenses. **Fixed contracts** are usually paid for when certain milestones are reached. **Time and materials contracts** are usually paid for monthly, based on the hours worked and other fees associated with the work, such as travel and meal expenses.

### Challenge 2: Inaccurately calculating TCO

Another budgeting pitfall you should try to avoid is underestimating the **total cost of ownership (TCO)** for project resources. TCO takes into account multiple elements that contribute to the cost of an item. It factors in the expenses associated with a product or service over its lifetime, rather than just up front costs.

Let's relate TCO to something more common, like owning a vehicle. Let's say you buy a vehicle for a certain price, but then you also pay for things related to the vehicle, such as license fes, registration fees, and maintenance. If you add all of this up, you have your TCO for that vehicle. So now that you know what your TCO is, you may consider those fees before you buy your next vehicle. For example, you might opt for a vehicle with fewer maintenance requirements than one that requires more frequent service, since you know that will save you money overall.

The same concept applies to budgeting on a project. If you have a service requirement for a software technology that your team is using, for example, then it is important to budget for the costs of maintenance for that service. Additional types of costs you may need to account for when calculating TCO include warranties, supplies, required add-on costs, and upgrade costs.

### Challenge 3: Scope Creep

**Scope creep** is when changes, growth, and other factors affect the project's scope at any point after the project begins. Scope creep causes additional work that wasn't planned for, so scope creep can also impact your budget.

There are several factors that can lead to scope creep, such as:

- A vague Statement of Work (SoW)
- Conversations and agreements about the project that aren't officially documented
- Unattainable timeframes and deadlines
- Last-minute asks from priority stakeholders

Addressing these factors as you plan your project can help prevent scope creep from impacting your budget.

### Key takeaway: Overcoming budgeting challenges

There can be many challenges to face when planning and managing a budget. Budget pre-allocation, underestimating the TCO of project resources, and scope creep are some of the most common. As you continue your career as a project manager, awareness of these challenges can hel you avoid and overcome them.

## Optional: Introduction to budgeting terms

### Cash flow

**Cash flow** is the inflow and outflow of cash on your project. As a project manager, this important to understand because you need **funding** (cash into your project) to keep your project running.

Cash that comes into your project allows you to maintain and compensate resources and pay invoices for materials or outside services, In some cases, a project may start out with all of the cash it will receive until the end. If this is the case, it is important to monitor your outflow to ensure that you have enough funding to complete the project.

Monitoring cash flow allows you to have a reference point for your project's health. For example, if the cash flow coming into your project is lower than your outflow, you will need to adjust your budget. Planning and tracking the cash flow for your project is a key component of budget management.

### CAPEX and OPEX

Organizations have a number of different types of expenses, from the wages they pay their employees to the cost of materials for their products. These expenses can be organized into different categories. Two of the most common are **CAPEX (capital expenses)** and **OPEX (operating expenses)**.

- CAPEX (capital expenses) are an organization's major, long-term, upfront expenses, such as building, equipment, and vehicles. They are generally for assets that the company will own and keep. The company incurs these expenses because they believe they will create a benefit for the company in the future.
- OPEX (operating expenses) are the short-term expenses that are required for the day-to-day tasks involved in running the company, such as wages, rent, and utilities. They are often recurring.

You may need to account for both OPEX and CAPEX on your projects. For example, a major software acquisition as part of an IT project could be treated by your organization as a capital expense. The monthly wages paid to a contractor to help deploy the software would be an operating expense. It's a good idea to talk to your finance or accounting department when you start working on your project budget to see how they determine the difference between OPEX and CAPEX. This will guide you in a properly allocating capital and operating expenses for your projects.

### Contingency reserves

Sometimes, a project hits a snap and incurs additional expenses. One way to prepare for unplanned costs is by using **contingency reserves**. Contingency reserves are funds added to the estimate project cost to cover identified risks. These are also referred to as **buffers**.

To determine the amount of your contingency reserves, you will need to go through the risk management process and identify the risks that are most likely to occur. We will go into more detail on risk management later in the course, but it is important to understand that risks to your project can have an impact on your budget.

Contingency reserves can also be used to cover areas where actual costs turn out to be higher than estimated costs. For example, you may estimate a certain amount for labor costs, but if a contracted worker on your team gets a raise, then the actual costs will be higher than you estimated.

### Management reserves

While contingency reserves are used to cover the costs of identified risks, **management reserves** are used to cover the costs of unidentified risks. For example, if you were managing a construction project and a meteor hit your machinery, you could use management reserves to cover the costs of the damage.

Contingency reserves are an estimated amount, whereas management reserves are generally a percentage of the total cost of the project. To determine a project's management reserves, you can estimate a percentage of the budget to set aside. This estimate is typically between 5-10%, but the amount is based on the complexity of the project. A project with a more complex scope may require higher management reserves. Note that the project manager will generally need approval from the project sponsor in order to use management reserves.

[<---Back](../README.md)
