# Managing budgeting and procurement

## Understanding procurement

Let's say you're trying to take up painting. In order to paint, you'll need to purchase, or in other words, procure paint supplies and materials. So first, you ask yourself, what supplies will you need? What kind of paint will you start with? Do you want to try oil paint, watercolor or acrylic?

Will you pain on canvas, wood, or paper? You need to research these choices before you procure your materials. Once your research is done, you can start procuring materials, scheduling courses, watching tutorials, and voila-you're on your way to becoming the next Frida Kahlo!

> ### Procurement
>
> Obtaining all of the materials, services, and supplies required to complete the project
>
> ### Vendors
>
> Individuals or businesses who provide essential goods and services

So as you may have guessed by now, procurement means obtaining all of the materials, services, and supplies required to complete the project. You'll need to procure vendors as well. Vendors are individuals or businesses who provide essential goods and services. Therefore, think of vendor management as procurement for individuals or businesses.

Vender management covers the activities included in researching and sourcing vendors. Instead of materials, vendor management is often a matter of sourcing for a specific service or talent and then managing that relationship. Sourcing talent includes researching and obtaining estimated costs from different partner companies you may use on a project. You'll typically use vendors when they provide specialized skills that aren't available within your company. Vendor management entails:

- Sourcing vendors,
- Getting quotes for their work,
- Deciphering which vendors will best fulfill your needs,
- Negotiating their contracts,
- Setting deadlines for them,
- Evaluating performance,
- Ensuring payments are made.

It also entails familiarizing yourself with regulations like the Americans with Disabilities Act, if you're working the US, for example. And if you were somewhere else, being aware of similar regulations in that country. Keep in mind that not every project wil require vendors or contractors, and so every project won't require vendor management. Let's revisit the example of contract workers in the context of Project Plant Pals at Office Green.

Like many companies, Office Green doesn't have a copywriting department, so for the launch of Project Plant Pals, you'll need to use external resources to supply a contracted copywriter. This person is a necessary team member on the project because Office Green doesn't have copywriters or internal employee resources required to finish this task. This contractor or team of contractors will draft copy for the website for a slated amount of time, and then their work on this particular project will be complete.

### The procurement process

There are typically five steps that make up the procurement process.

- Initiating
- Selecting
- Contract writing
- Control
- Completing

**First is initiating**, which is the planning process of defining what help you may need outside of your current resources to hit the project goals. In this step, you will also make a case for getting extra resources via the procurement process. **Second is selecting**, which entails deciding what supplies you need and which vendors you'll go through. The **third step is contract writing**, which is where the contracts are developed, reviewed, and signed. **The fourth step is control**, which is when you make payments, set up logistics and requirements to maintain quality, and ensure the service agreement is being met. **The fifth and final step is completing**. which is where you measure the success of the procurement. That's a quick overview of the procurement process. This high-level cycle of procurement will make more sens as we continue on through this course.

One thing to note is the procurement process can seem a little different depending on the project management methodology. There are differences in procurement in the context of Agile versus traditional.

> ### Agile procurement management
>
> - Collaborative with both the project team and the end supplier
> - Emphasis on the relationship between these parties
> - Project team plays a larger role in identifying what needs to be procured
> - Living contract

Agile procurement management is often more collaborative, with both the project team and the end supplier than traditional approaches. There is a heavy emphasis on the relationship between these parties. The whole project team plays a larger role in identifying what needs to be procured. Rather than featuring contracts that are based on fixed deliverables, Agile procurement management tends to have a living contract that can be adapted based on the evaluation of the project. If you think of the word "agility", which means to move easily and quickly, you'll be able to remember that Agile procurement can change more easily than traditional procurement methods. In this process, the team reviews the project or deliverables on a reoccurring basis and consistently addresses feedback. This way of working important to communicate to your suppliers so they understand this style of working and agree to maintain flexibility. Again, it is so important to have a positive relationship with the procurement supplier. This is critical since the contract may need to be renegotiated at multiple points during the project.

> ### Traditional procurement management
>
> - Focus on standard contracts with clear terms and deliverables
> - Project manager may be responsible for end-to-end procurement
> - Contract may feature lengthy and extensive documentation

On the other hand, traditional procurement management tends to focus on standard contracts with clear terms and deliverables. When it comes to traditional approaches, the project manager may be responsible for end-to-end procurement instead of the entire team providing input. The contracts may feature lengthy and extensive documentation that includes fixed requirements and comprehensive detail of the services and deliverables. While this may appear more rigid, the benefit is you've outlined clearer works streams and deadlines. This way, you're much more protected from unforeseen circumstances and may not have to pay for unpredictable changes. In traditional approaches, the negotiation process can be a little bit trickier. You won't necessarily have the room to renegotiate contracts if something changes, so you may have to start the whole process over again. That's why being as detailed as possible and spending more time in the negotiation phase is incredibly important in a more traditional project management approach. As you may have guessed, procurement can become pretty complex, but there are som official documents that can help guide you through the procurement process.

## Tips for the procurement process

As you have learned, **procurement** means obtaining all of the materials, services, and supplies required to complete the project. You have just learned about the procurement process in project management. To recap, there are five steps in the typical procurement process:

1. **Initiating:** planning what you need to meet your project goals
1. **Selecting:** deciding which suppliers and vendors to use
1. **Contract writing:** developing, reviewing, and signing contracts
1. **Controlling:** making payments and maintaining and ensuring quality
1. **Completing:** measuring your success

During each step of the procurement process, there are some tips that can help you save time and money while ensuring your project's success.

### Tips for initiating

While planning your project, figure out which materials, resources, and supplies you will need to get the job done. During this step, you will decide which items will be internally procured and which items will be externally outsourced. Once you've decided which items you need to outsource, compare each of those items specifications, components, quality measurements, standards, and characteristics with your project's requirements. You may find that some of the items have features you don't need. If you can identify those unnecessary features, you will know exactly what you want and don't want in an item, possibly reducing your total cost.

### Tips for selecting

NOw that you have outlined what you need for your project, you need to determine vendors to source these items. Research and assess various vendors and suppliers, and try to find out if your preferred vendors have a reputation for delivering quality work on time. After you've identified your preferred vendors and suppliers, interview them to learn more about their products and services. If possible, make site visits to see exactly how each vendor runs their business in person.

### Tips for contract writing

Contract writing requires excellent attention to detail, so pay close attention to the inclusions and exclusions in the vendor's offer. There may be some items included in the vendor's price that you can provide in-house at low or no additional cost. For example, the vendor's offer may include charges for storing materials, using certain equipment, or labor. These are all things that you may be able to provide from your organization's resources, so you can opt to save costs with the vendor on those items by using in-house materials and resources.

Sometimes, the vendor may write the contract. In this case, checking carefully for clarity and accuracy ensure that you know exactly what you are getting from the vendor. Whether the contract is written by you or by the vendor, you will almost always want to consult with a legal and compliance team to ensure that everything in the contract is ethical and legal.

### Tips for controlling

The procurement process isn't over when the contracts are signed. The next step is to ensure that the work is being done according to the terms of the contract. You will need to periodically review the performance and quality.

### Tips for completing

In the completing step of the procurement process, you will measure the success of your procurements. Ask yourself:

- Were the materials created good quality?
- Were there any issues with labor contracts?
- How were your relationships with vendors?

During this step, it is also important to document any lessons learned. It is likely that you will be involved in another project similar to this one in the future. Take notes about how the procurement process went so you can use this information on a future project.

### Key takeaways: Tips for the procurement process

Procurement is an ongoing process that can be repeated during the life cycle of a project. You may initiate the procurement process several times over if you need additional deliverables. To do so, you will likely evaluate your current vendors-or select new ones if necessary. If you change vendors or contract terms, you will have to write new contracts. It is important to periodically review the quality of each vendor during the controlling phase and, once everything is finished, document the lessons you learned during the completion phase.

## Common procurement documentation

There are a few important documents that help a project manager navigate through each phase of procurement. For instance, in the initiating phase, a project manager will create a nondisclosure agreement, otherwise known as an NDA. In the selecting phase, a project manager creates a request for proposal, or an RFP. In the contracting phase, a statement of work or an SOW is created. Now lets learn more about these acronyms and documents.

The first important document is a nondisclosure agreement, also known as an NDA. NDA is a standard within a lot of companies, and it's best practice to ask external contract workers to sign an NDA. The purpose of an NDA is to keep confidential information within the organization. So for instance, if a company is using some kind of proprietary technology on a project or preparing for a sensitive product launch, they wan to ensure that any conversations or information surrounding that technology doesn't leak out to competitors or to the public before the company is ready to launch. For example, in Project Plants Pals, vendors might be required to sign an NDA because the project is new to market and hasn't been made public yet. Then we have a request for proposal or an RFP, a document that outlines the details and requirements of an organization's project to be passed on to vendors. RFPs are used to solicit bids from vendors so that you can then select which vendor might be the best for your project. An RFP is widely used within different departments in a company and across various industries. An RFP typically includes an overview of the project, the desired outcomes, and goals, budget, deadlines, milestones, and contact information so each vendor can get back to you with a detailed proposal of how they play to tackle the job. When creating an RFP, make sure to add the following headers to your document.

- The overview: Treat this section like a general summary.
  - What is the purpose of this project?
  - What problems will it solve?
  - What new doors will it open for the company?
- Your goals: What are some measurable result you can aim to achieve throughout the process?
- Scope of work: What are the specifics of the project?
  - How are you going to achieve those goals and make sure the project launches successfully?
- Milestones: Highlight the key milestones your project will include.
- Submission requirements:
  - `Please submit the RFP as a presentation and include three prototypes`
  - Questions you'd like the vendor to answer as part of the process
  - This helps you properly assess potential vendors. For instance, you might want to know what issues a contractor sees up front or how the costs will break down.

After the RFP is sent out, various vendors will review it, and if they feel they can fulfill your project's needs, they'll provide a proposal. For example, you may create and RFP for Project Plants Pals to source plant provides. In this case, you want to send out RFP's to all possible plant providers to ensure that you're getting the best price, quality, and overall value. You may hear RFP being used as a ver, as in, "Has this been RFP's yet?" That's really a way of asking if an RFP has been sent out to vendors yet. It's important to note that both the NDA and the RFP are fixed and remain the same throughout the process. This means that there's not a lot of room for customization, and it won't be changed once it's submitted.

Lastly, there's a third important document called a STatement of Work, or an SOW. An SOW is sent after the vendor is selected and evolves as the project goes on.

[<---Back](../README.md)
