# Navigating procurement challenges

## Obtaining procurement Support

The procurement process doesn't end after you've selected vendors and signed contracts. You'll use performance trackers and meetings like quarterly business reviews to track and evaluate overall performance to ensure that both parties are living up to their initial agreement, and when there are contracts and paperwork with terminology that you may not be familiar with, you will enlist the help of a legal team. Depending on the company size, the legal situation may vary. Some companies (usually well-established and larger business) will have a legal team. Some businesses may outsource their legal team. Some startups or smaller companies may not have a legal team, but they might reach out to legal advisors as needed. Again, this all depends on the company where you work. Laws surrounding manufacturing products and consumerism will vary from country to country, but there will nearly always be laws in place that you'll need to follow around topics like fair and ethical trade. Most companies have a mission or value statement. Sometimes, a team of people in the ethics and compliance departments are tasked with ensuring that the day to day operations are adhering to their value statement and governmental policies. These team members will also be tasked with duties like working to prevent discrimination and making sure that the company is practicing adequate corporate social responsibility. Also, as a project manager, you need to ensure that the various stakeholders who are representing the business are adhering to these policies and processes too.

You'll all need to be aware of any pertinent meetings regarding legal or compliance issues, and you as a project manager will have to remind the team about when those meetings are being held. Looping in the appropriate stakeholders is especially critical if there's some kind of necessary approval since it'll have an impact on the project on way or another. Like most projects for Project Plant Pals, looping in legal and compliance for review and approvals is really important. For instance, let's say some of the offices where you're delivering plants are pet-friendly. In your contract with the supplier, you've specified that you want to offer non-toxic plants only. Unfortunately, the supplier provided a plant with leaves that are harmful to animals. Office Green could potentially be liable and in legal trouble because this critical detail was missed. Pretty crucial consideration, right? So, regardless of your future company's legal team or advisory, having contracts reviewed in some capacity makes good business sense and should be a priority for you as a project manager.

## Ethics in the procurement process

Let's learn more about the importance of ethics when partnering with vendors. Failing to be mindful when choosing vendors can lead to significant consequences. If you've seen a company in the news that's been entangled in a scandal, that usually means that the team probably should have done more research in the procurement process. What does that entail? There's a lot that can be done to ensure that businesses are operating in an ethical way. Project managers have a big job when deciphering whether or not every aspect of their project is sourced ethically. It helps if the project manager thoroughly oversees the project to make sure the safety, economic, and environmental ethical risks are mitigated; in other words, doing a lot of research. Monitoring and evaluating throughout the project is a project's manager's job. There are a couple of steps to safeguard ethical procurement. The first is knowing your business' legal requirements. You'll want to have a deep understanding of what is required of you legally as a project manager for your business. You can also seek out the code of ethics for your profession, which in this case is for project managers. For instance, the Project Management Institute, also known as PMI, has a code of ethics that you can access as a member or credential holder. This will help you understand some parameters for how to assess ethical versus unethical procurement.

> ### "Honesty, responsibility, respect, and fairness are the values that drive ethical conduct for the project management profession."

According to the PMI's Code of Ethics, honesty, responsibility, respect, and fairness are the values that drive ethical conduct for the project management profession. When you become a project manager, if you aren't totally sure if something is ethical, first try to use your best judgement based on what you believe those words mean, and continue to do the required research. If you still aren't sure, don't hesitate to ask a subject matter expert, such as someone from the legal team.

> ### Potential unethical Risks
>
> - Bribery and corruption
> - Sole-supplier sourcing
> - Interaction with state-owned entities

As a starting point, some unethical issues or risks you may run into may include bribery or corruption. Some regulations in other countries may not be the same as regulations in your country. For example, you'll want to make sure laborers involved in production are treated fairly, working in good conditions, and are compensated adequately for their work. It is a good idea to consult your legal team to ensure that you don't run into these situations and to be aware of the regulations surrounding your processes. You will also want to beware of possible issues with sole-supplier sourcing. In some scenarios, you may need to perform non-competitive procurement, which is when a company restricts the bidding process to one supplier. This may be common for companies who are more cautious about exposing trade secrets. But regardless of your reasoning, you will need to be able to justify exactly why you are choosing to restrict bidding to one supplier. There's also interaction with state-owned entities. You'll want ot be vigilant when dealing with government agencies and officials. Government agencies may have tighter restrictions and regulations in regard to sourcing, and you don't want ot do anything unethical without even knowing it. A project manager monitors the project's ethics throughout the whole process.

In the initiating phase, you'll need to decide whether the project is ethical in the first place. Does it meet your business' Code of Ethics? Does the project meet environmental ethics laid out by governmental agencies? Is the labor going to be ethically sourced? You'll need to review government regulations and policies, assess potential risks, and put together a diverse team that you trust to be ethical. Before the contracts are signed, you'll want to figure out whether the suppliers you're thinking of hiring are ethical. You'll want to make sure that you're procuring them in an ethical way and are paying them a fair rate. You'll also want to completely understand the supply chain if there is one. After the contracts have been signed by your contractors, make sure to carry out your assurance duties. This may include things like auditing each task and cost, executing quality control, or even approving invoices. During the production of your service or product, focus on the day-to-day relationships with vendors to make sure they're away of and meeting your deliverables and keeping you informed of any potential road blocks.

After you've done all the research that you possibly can on whether your project is ethical, remember to trust yourself. If something feels work, it probably is. As you know, there's a lot to keep track of as a project manager. By keeping these ethical principles in mind as you begin your project, you will save yourself and the company from a lot of headaches later on. Of course, you can usually go to you legal team or key stakeholders if you ever have a question or need a second opinion.

## Avoiding ethical traps in procurement

### Understanding ethical traps

An `ethical tap` is an ethical dilemma that causes us to make a certain decision without regard for our ethical principles. You may face ethical traps throughout the course of a project. However, ethics can be of particular concern when it comes to procurement. As you have learned, project managers must take precautions to ensure that they and their suppliers are following ethical principles during the procurement process.

### Common ethical traps

Sometimes, potential ethical issues can be overlooked or can be considered the necessary cost of doing business. This is a dangerous line of thinking since these types of assumptions can put your project, company, and career at risk. To review what we discussed, a few of the most common ethical traps that exist when conducting procurements are corruption and bribery, sole-supplier sourcing, and interactions with state-owned agencies.

#### Corruption and bribery

You may be confronted with different types of corruption when going through the procurement process. One form of corruption is when a vendor seeks to reduce the competition for a contract during the bidding process. A company may attempt to bring members within the organization to sway their decision into a favorable outcome for the vendor. Bribes may include things like money, gifts, tickets to events, and more. Another type of corruption scheme is to offer a certain percentage of an awarded contract-also known as a _kickback_- to an official who can ensure that their company wins the bid.

#### Sole-supplier sourcing

In some situations, having a vendor who a company is already familiar with smooths the procurement process and works well for both parties. Ethical issues arise when other vendors aren't even allowed to bid for contracts for which they are similarly qualified. With **sole-supplier sourcing**, vendors may reach out to buyers before a bid is even requested. When the buyer's organization decides to work with that vendor based on their previously-0established relationship, that limits competition before the bidding has even begun. When this happens, companies and the public miss out on the advantages of competition, such as reasonable pricing, product quality standards, or speedy delivery options.

#### Interactions with state-owned entities

There are some instances in which government agencies require an organization to adhere to stricter ethical standards than they might have otherwise. Governmental agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, for example, keep businesses within legal and ethical standards. If you are unfamiliar with any governmental restrictions that may affect your industry, organization, or project, you could unintentionally fall into an ethical trap.

### Avoiding ethical traps

#### Understand the legal requirements for your procurements

Every country has regulations to adhere to when conducting business in that country. Be sure to research the legal and ethical requirements based on your project and procurement needs, and if your organization has a legal team, make sure to lean on them for support and advice.

#### Stick to your ethical codes

Honesty, responsibility, respect, and fairness are the values that underpin ethical behavior in the project management profession The Project Management Institute's (PMI) [code of ethics](https://www.pmi.org/about/ethics/code) provides detailed guidelines to help ensure you maintain ethical conduct in your projects.

#### Test your ethics

When you face an ethical dilemma, ask yourself questions in each of the following categories:

- **Shame:** Would you be ashamed if someone knew what you did?
- **Community:** Would you want your friend to know the decision you made?
- **Legal:** Would you face legal action if you too this action?
- **Situation:** Would your actions be justified in this situation?
- **Consequence:** Would a negative outcome be worth your actions?

### Key takeaway: Avoiding ethical traps in procurement

Making a decision when facing an ethical dilemma can be challenging. But learning the legal requirements for your procurements, sticking to a professional code of ethics, and testing yourself on the ethics of your decision making can help you avoid ethical traps and conduct your procurements honestly, responsibly, and fairly.

[<---Back](../README.md)
