# Fundamentals of project initiation

## Steps to kicking off a project

- Initiating the project
- Identifying project scope, goals, and deliverables
- Measure the success of a project
- Identifying stakeholders
- Scoping project tools and resources

## Why is project initiation essential?

> Initiation is the first phase within the project life cycle.

Because initiation is the first phase of the project, it's really important to get it right. A well planned initiation results in a strong foundation for the project, and sets it up for success.

Initiation begins after a problem or opportunity has been identified within an organization.

Often, stakeholders like senior leaders at a company will initiate a project to address a specific need for the business. For example, perhaps the company would like to roll out a new product, improve employee well being, or reduce costs in a certain department.

It's the responsibility as the project manager to help identify the project goals, resources, and other details based on initial discussions with the project stakeholders. Even though someone else might come up with an idea for the project, it's still your job to figure out all the important pieces that need to come together in order to get the work done.

The initiation phase is a crucial time for asking stakeholders the right questions, performing research, determining resources, and clearly documenting the key components of a project. Doing this will help you solidify the scope, or boundary, of the project.

If the project isn't initiated properly, things can go wrong pretty fast. For example, without sufficient understanding of the project's goals, you might underestimate what resources you need or how long the project might take. Or, without agreeing with stakeholders on what success looks like, you might thing the project was completed successfully, while the stakeholders might thing it didn't accomplish their goals. Getting on the same page and gaining clarity during the initiation phase can save a lot of time and extra work for everyone throughout the project.

Proper initiation also helps ensure that the benefits of the project outcomes will outweigh the costs of the project.

> ### Cost Benefit Analysis <br>
>
> The process of adding up the expected value of a project-the benefits- and comparing them to the dollar costs.

To determine this, you'll do what's called a cost benefit analysis, which is the process of adding up the expected value of a project (the benefits) and comparing them to the dollar costs. To do this, you will work with stakeholders to consider a few questions. To determine the benefits of a projects, those questions might included:

### Benefits

- What value will this project?
- How much money could this project save our organization?
- How much money will it bring in from existing customers?
- How much time will be saved?
- How will the user experience be improved?

To determine the cost of the project, ask:

### Costs

- How much time will people have to spend on this project?
- What will be the on-time costs?
- Are there any ongoing costs?
- What about long-term costs?

## Key components of project initiation

There are several key components of initiation that you need to consider in order for your project to be successful:

- Goals
  - The goal is what you've been asked to do and what you're trying to achieve.
- Scope
  - This is the process to define the work that needs to happen to complete the project.
- Deliverables
  - Products and services that you will create for your customer, client, or project sponsor
- Success Criteria
  - The standards by which you measure how successful a project was in reaching its goals
- Stakeholders
  - The people who both have an interest in, and are affected by, the completion and success of a project.
- Resources
  - Budget
  - People
  - Materials
  - other items that you will have at your disposal

Once you've established your goals, scope, deliverables, success criteria, stakeholders, and resources, it's time to create a project charter.

> ### Project charter <br>
>
> A document that clearly defines the project and its goals, and outlines what is needed to accomplish them.

A project charter allows you to get organized, set up a framework for what needs to be done and communicate those details to others. Review the project charter with stakeholders once it's drafted.

## Performing a cost-benefit analysis

### The benefits of a cost-benefit analysis

A cost-benefit analysis can minimize risks and maximize gains for project and organizations. It can help you communicate clearly with stakeholders and executives and keep your project on track. Because this type of analysis uses objective data, it can help reduce biases and keep stakeholder self-interest from influencing decisions.

Comparing a project's benefits to its costs can help you make a strong business case to stakeholders and leadership and ensure your organization pursues the most profitable or useful projects. Organizations use cost-benefit analyses to reduce waste and invest their resources responsibly.

### Guiding questions for a cost-benefit analysis

When pursuing a project, the benefits should outweigh the costs. It's important for you and your stakeholders to consider questions like the ones that follow early on, while you prepare the proposal.

To determine the benefits of a project, you might ask:

- What value will this project create?
- How much money could this project save our organization?
- How much money will it bring in from existing customers?
- How much time will it save?
- How will it improve the customer experience?

And to determine the costs of a project, consider questions such as:

- How much time will people have to spend on this project?
- What are the one-time costs?
- Are there any ongoing costs?
- What about long-term costs?

Also consider questions about **intangible benefits**. These are gains that are not quantifiable, such as:

- **Customer satisfaction**. Will the project increase customer retention, causing them to spend more on the company's products or services?
- **Employee satisfaction**. Is the project likely to improve employee moral, reducing turnover?
- **Employee productivity**. Will the project reduce employee's overtime hours, saving the company money?
- **Brand perception**. Is the project likely to improve the company's brand perception and recognition, attracting more customers or providing a competitive advantage?

Flip these questions to consider **intangible** **_costs_**. These are costs that are not quantifiable. For example, might the project put customer retention, employee satisfaction, or brand perception at risk?

### Calculating costs and benefits

The process of calculating costs and benefits is also called calculating **return on investment** (ROI). There are many wayt to determine a projects ROI, but the easiest way is to compare the upfront and ongoing costs to its benefits over time.

A common ROI Formula:

> # (G-C) / C = ROI

**G** represents the financial gains you expect from the project, and **C** represents the upfront and ongoing costs of your investment in the project.

- $6,000 upfront cost
- $300 per year ($25 per month for 12 months) <br>
  = $6,300

- $10,000 Estimate Revenue over the course of that year

($10,000 - $6,300) / $6,300 = 0.58 = 58%

The ROI comes to 0.58/57%. You consider this to be a strong ROI, so you decide to pursue the project.

## References

- [Cost Benefit Analysis for Project - A Step-by-Step Guide](https://www.projectmanager.com/blog/cost-benefit-analysis-for-projects-a-step-by-step-guide)
- [Cost Benefit or Benefit Cost Analysis](https://pmstudycircle.com/cost-benefit-or-benefit-cost-analysis/#:~:text=Cost%2Dbenefit%20analysis%20is%20a,during%20the%20project%20selection%20analysis)

[<---BACK](../googlePmCert.md)
