# Code 201 Class 3 Reading Notes

## Lists

- There are three types of HTML lists: ordered, unordered, and definition
- Ordered lists use numbers.
- Unordered lists use bullets.
- Definition lists are used to define terminology.
- Lists can be nested inside one another.

### Example of Definition

```json
  <dl>
    <dt>definition</dt>
      <dd>a statement of the exact meaning of a word, especially in a dictionary</dd>
  </dl>
```

## Boxes

### Border, Margin & Padding

Every box has three available properties that can be adjusted to control it's appearance.

Every box has a **border** (even if it is not visible or is specified to be 0 pixels wide). The **border** seperates the edge of one box from another.

**Margins** sit outside the edge of the border. You can set the width of a **margin** to create a gap between the borders of two adjacent boxes.

**Padding** is the space between the broder of a box and any content conatained within it. Adding **padding** can increase the readiability of its contents.

### Rounded Corners

```json
p {
  border: 5px solid #ee3e80;
  padding: 20px;
  width: 275px;
  border-radius: 10px;
  -moz-border-radius: 10px;
  -webkit-border-radius: 10px;
}
```

- CSS treats each HTML element as if it has its own box.
- It is possible to hide elemenets using the display and visibility properties.

## Arrays

> An array is a special type of variable. It doesn't just store one value; it stores a list of values.

```json
var colors;
colors = ['white', 'black', 'custom'];
```

## IF...Else Statements

The **if...else** statement checks a condition.
If it resolves to *true* the first code block is executed.
If the condition resolves to *false* the second code block is run instead.

```json
if (score >= pass) {
  msg = 'Congratulations, you passed!';
} else {
  msg = 'Have another go!';
}
```

## Loops

**Loops** check a condition. If it returns *true*, a code blaock will run. Then the condition will be checked again and if it still returns *true*, the code block will run again. It repeats until the condition returns *false*. There are three common types of loops.

### FOR

>If you need to run code a specific number of times, use **for** loop. (It is the most common loop.) In a **for** loop, the condition is usually a counter which is used to tell how many times the loop should run.

### WHILE

>If you do not know how many times the code should run, you can use a **while** loop. Here the condition can be something other than a counter, and the code will contiunue to loop for as long as the condition is **true**.

### DO WHILE

>The **do...while** loop is very similar to the **while** loop, but has one key difference: it will always run the statements inside the curly braces at least once, even if the condition evaluates to **false**.

- Logical operators allow you to combine more than one set of comparison operators.
- Data types can be coerced from one type to another.

[<---BACK](README.md)
