# Project Planning: Putting it All Together

## Getting started with Putting it all together

> - ### Kicking off the planning phase
>
> - ### Setting and reaching milestones and identifying tasks
>
> - ### Budgeting process
>
> - ### Identifying and planning for risks
>
> - ### Documentation

First up, demonstrating how to kick off the planning phase. Then exploring the importance of setting and reaching milestones. For every milestone, there'll be a set of tasks to complete, so there will be some tips for breaking down and distributing the workload.

Later, discussing the budget and how the overall budgeting process works. We'll learn about people or companies outside of your organization that may play a role in determining the budget, and we'll discuss the importance of sufficiently documenting your budget.

Then we'll discuss the various risks and the possible impact those risks can have on the project. Nothing ever goes quite as planned, but risk management is a great way to make sure you know what could go wrong and how you'll address it. This includes communicating possible risks to your stakeholders, creating a mitigation plan, and then keeping an eye on those risks to make sure they don't stall your projects.

Last but not least, documentation ties it all together. Keeping all your project plans documented and organized not only helps your, but it also he;ps those involved knowing their responsibilities. Documentation also provides stakeholders with a window into the development of the project. It has always been important to the success of my own projects at Google, and I'm excited to explore this topic with your.

## Understanding the planning phase components

### The benefits of project planning

> - **Project manager gets assigned**
> - **Project goals, scope, and deliverables have to be approved**
> - **Team members get assigned**
> - **Sign off on your project charter**

Previously, we went over the initiation phase. During the initiation phase, the project manager is gathering all of the necessary preliminary information needed to get stakeholder approval and plan the project. A few key things need to happen during this time. First, the project manager gets assigned. Then, the goals of the project have to be approved, as well as the scope of the project and its deliverables. A number of people will need to be assigned to the project, and you'll have a good sense of their individual roles and responsibilities. You'll also need stakeholder sign off on your project charter. If all of those criteria have been met, then you're set to begin planning. Planning is a significant part of ensuring a project's success, so let's take some time to discuss why it's so important.

> - **Understand the work needed to achieve your goals**
> - **Coordinate efforts and timelines with other teams, contractors, and vendors**
> - **Identify and prepare for risks**
> - **Get "buy-in" from key members of the project team**
> - **Demonstrates to stakeholders that the team is taking care to start the project with a detailed plan**

Planning is important for any project, large or small. While planning your project, you and other members of the team will determine the processes and workflows needed to meet your goals and put together ideas about how to make the project a success. While planning, you might draw from previous project experience, but don't be afraid to think of new ways to get results. Every project is different, so new and different approaches may be just the thing you need. Planning has many benefits. As we've discussed, planning helps you map out the full project. It helps you understand the work needed to achieve your goals. Planning also helps coordinate efforts and timelines with other teams, contractors, and vendors. Another huge benefit of planning is that it give you time to identify and prepare fro risks that could impact your project. Those might include things like a delay in the timeline, the departure of a critical team member, or a change in project direction from a primary stakeholder. Planning also gives you the chance to brainstorm ways to mitigate or address those risks. There are less obvious benefits too. For example, the planning phase can help you get "buy-in" from key members of the project team. Getting buy-in means that you've gained their support ofr your plans. Planning also demonstrates to stakeholders that the team is taking care to start the project with a detailed plan. But one of the most significant benefits of planning is teamwork, which will help you push your project across the finish line. By working together in the planning phase, individuals assigned to the project can become a strong team by the time the planning is done and the work is about to start. Planning together creates a shared understanding among all parties involved in the project.

### Launching the planning phase

> - #### **Schedule**
>
> - #### **Budget**
>
> - #### **Risk management plan**

Getting into the details of how to launch the planning phase. The planning phase is the second phase of a project's life cycle. This can be a challenging time for a project manager because there's is so much to consider. but it's important to know that project plans don't have to be perfect the very first time. And, even if you do a great job with your plans the first time around, it's likely that the plan will change as the project evolves. The planning phase may differ from project to project, but generally three big things are worked out during this stage: the schedule, the budget, and the risk management plan. We'll discuss each of these in greater detail later on in the course. But for now, here's some general information so you can understand why these three elements are so crucial to planning. Let's start with the schedule.

> #### **Schedule**
>
> The project timeline, which includes the start date, the end date, and dates for events in between

The **schedule** is basically a timeline of the project. It includes the start date, the end date, and the dates for things tha twill happen in between. You will use time estimation techniques to determine these dates. let's imagine scheduling in our example project at Office Green. As a reminder, you are the lead project manager for project Plant Pals, a new service that will provide top clients with desk-friendly plants. you want to launch the service by the end of the year, so the planning phase for this effort should include a number of key dates. Those dates might include when you'll request proposals from plant vendors. They might also include the date you'll kick off with the web designers and developers who are creating a new website for the service. It should also include important dates during the project execution phase, like when the plants need to be ready for delivery or when the new webpage design needs to be approved, and you'll need to include the target date for the launch of the service. Another part of the planning phase is setting the budget.

> #### **Budget**
>
> The budget accounts for the total cost to complete the project

The **budget** will account for the total cost to complete the project. The total coast needs to be broken down to determine how much as to be spent on different elements of the project. For project Plant Pals, the budget will need to include item like the cost of designing and launching a webpage, the cost of hiring your plant vendor, and much more.

> #### **Risk Management**
>
> Searching for possible problems related to the project and planning ahead to mitigate these risks

The third component of the planning phase is **risk management**, which means searching for possible problems and planning ahead to mitigate these risks. Let's face it, risk is inevitable in every project. What's not inevitable is how the risk impacts your project. Good project planning means searching for places where trouble might occur. Where might the schedule get of track? Where might the budget exceed your estimates? You'll work with your team to consider answers to these questions and prepare a risk management plan based on whatever you discover.

Let's go back to the Office Green Example. While putting together the initial schedule, you may realize that your estimates from your developers put you way beyond your launch date. To manage that risk, you might try to reduce or adjust the project's scope to still meet your deadline or even negotiate a new launch date with your stakeholders. These are two simple examples of how you might mitigate a scheduling risk.

### Facilitating a project kick-off meeting

> #### **Project kick-off meeting**
>
> The first meeting in which a project team comes together to ground everyone in a shared vision, gain a shared understanding of the project's goals and scope, and to understand each person's individual roles withing the team

Now let's learn how to schedule a kickoff meeting, once you're ready to shift into planning mode. It's important to schedule a meeting that will serve as a format start to project planning. You might be wondering what a kickoff meeting is and how it differs from other types of meetings. That's a great question. A project kickoff meeting is the first meeting in which a project team comes together to ground everyone in a shared vision, gain a shared understanding of the project's goals and scope, and to understand each person's individual roles within the team.

> #### **Who to invite to a kick-off meeting**
>
> - Project team
> - Project stakeholders
> - Project sponsor

So who's invited to the kickoff meeting? Well, that would be the team members identified in a RACI chart, created during the initiation phase. As a reminder, a RACI chart helps to define roles and responsibilities for individuals or teams to ensure that the work gets done efficiently. During the kickoff meeting, team members will learn more about how they'll contribute to the project and how they'll gain a deeper understanding of how the team will work together to reach the project's goals. You should also invite your stakeholders and your sponsor to the meeting, so that they have a chance to understand the high-level plan for the project, can share their perspective, and you can ensure that everyone is on the same page.

> - **Establish a shared vision**
> - **Align on scope**
> - **Build team rapport**
> - **Ask questions and offer insights**
> - **Set expectations**

Now, you might be wondering, why do I need a kickoff meeting? Can't my team learn everything they need to know from the project charter? We get it. Meeting can be time-consuming, and they are definitely situations when a quick email or a chat to a teammate will suffice. But when you're kicking off a project, especially larger projects with multiple people involved, it's important to get together to establish a shared vision, align on the scope, and build team rapport. This is also an opportunity for teammates to ask questions and offer insights, and it's a great time for you to set expectations with the team about how each person will individually contribute to the project.

Now let's discuss how to plan and run a kickoff meeting. There are lots of templates for kickoff meeting agendas online, but most follow a similar structure and last about an hour. Keep in mind that this is just a suggestion, and you should feel free to schedule as much or as little time for each agenda item according to the needs of your project and the team.
Most meetings start with brief introductions:

- Allocate about 10 minutes for everyone in the group to **introduce** themselves and their roles, and if time allows, share a fun fact to help build team rapport.
- Then you'll spend about 5 minutes giving an overview of the **background** of the project.
  - This covers details like how th project came to be and why the project matters.
  - You'll also use this time to set a shared vision.
- 5 minutes sharing the **goals and the scope**, which refers to the boundaries around a project.
  - Includes making it clear what work is considered in-scope, and what work is considered out-of-scope.
  - Good place to share the target launch date and highlight any important milestones the team needs to be aware of.
- 5 minutes to discuss **roles**, ensure everyone is clear on what work they'll be responsible for throughout the duration of the project.
- 10 minutes to address **collaboration**, how the team will work together on the project
  - Go over tools that will serve as a communal source of information for the team, like project plan created ina spreadsheet or work management software tool like Asana.
  - Determine how the team will communicate with one another, like through daily email updates, team chat room, and weekly team check-in meetings.
- 10 minutes setting expectations for **what's coming up**.
  - Make clear to each teammate what actions they will need to take next
- 15 minutes for **questions** from the group.
  - Gives the team a chance to gain clarity on any of the topics discussed so far.
  - Also a chance to hear from the team and ensure that the project is benefiting from diversity of thoughts, experiences, and ideas.
    - For example, in addition to fielding questions out loud in the meeting, invite teammates to input their questions or feedback ina shared documents. This practice can help create space for collaboration.
    - Also, pool teammates for confidence on the topics discussed that day. Scale from 1-5: one "not confident at all", five, "I'm extremely confident". Offer help if they are not confident. This helps give the team a stronger sense of support. Be sure to deliver on any promises you make here. This will show you are a project manager that gets things done and remove roadblocks.

So to recap, the kickoff meeting will cover introductions, project background, goals and scope, roles, collaboration, and what comes next, and the meeting will eave time for questions from the group at the end.

> #### **Best practices**
>
> - Ask a teammate to take notes on key points and action items
> - After the meeting, send a follow up email that summarizes the key points and outcomes from the meeting, and any action items to the attendees
> - Invite attendees to reach out if they have any additional questions

Once you've finalized the meeting agenda, document this information into a meeting agenda template, and send it to attendees a day or two ahead of the meeting. As the project manager, you'll be leading the majority of this meeting, and when you're presenting, it's difficult to take notes and present at the same time. So, at the start of the meeting, ask a teammate to take notes on key points discussed throughout the session and to record each teammate's action items. In some cases, it may be beneficial to record this meeting so that attendees can revisit it later, especially if you have a large or dispersed team. Just be sure to get each attendee's permission to record ahead of time.

After the meeting, don't forget to send a follow-up email to the group, summarizing key points and outcomes from the meeting, as well as any action items to the attendees. In your follow-up email, be sure to also invite attendees to reach out if they have any additional questions.

While there's a lot that goes into the kickoff meeting, remember that this is an exciting moment for the team and especially for you as the project manager. All of the careful thinking and hard work that you've done during the initiation phase comes together to for the foundation of your project.

[<---Back](../README.md)
