# Key Project manager roles and responsibilities

Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to meet the project requirements and achieve the desired outcome. Project managers usually follow a process that involves planning and organizing, managing tasks, budgeting, and controlling costs, and other factors, so that the project can be completed within the approved budget and time frame.

Breaking these down:

- **Planning and organizing**: making use of productivity tools and creating processes. During the planning and execution of a project, you might need to use certain tools and develop processes to improve information sharing across the team; you may also need to create plans, timelines, schedules, and other forms of documentation to track project completion, and you'll usually need to maintain those documents throughout the entirety of the project.
- **Budgeting and controlling costs**: While the project is underway, changes to the plan and budget are bound to come up. This requires constant monitoring and managing the budget, track issues and risks as they arise, and manage quality by mitigating those issues and risks. ONe way to do this is by removing unforeseen barriers that come up. For example, a barrier could be if if a teammates lacking the resources needed to complete a task, you might identify the issue, or barrier upfront, escalate the issue to a stakeholder, work to secure the resource so your team can move forward.
- **Managing tasks**: A project task is an activity that needs to be accomplished within a set period of time by you, your team, or your stakeholders. Keeping track of tasks is a great way to help manage the team's workload and ensure that things are getting done. Keeping track of tasks is also a great tool for demonstrating progress to people outside the immediate team, like your stakeholders.

## Responsibilities that utilize interpersonal skills

The project manager is responsible for planning, organizing, managing tasks, budgeting, controlling costs, and other factors to help keep the project within budget and on time.

A project manager is responsible for tracking the day-to-day details of the project, but you will also have an opportunity to step back and see the bigger picture of the overall project.

Other responsibilities include:

- Teaching and mentoring
- Building relationships
- Controlling change
- Empowering your team
- Communicating status and concerns

### Teaching and mentoring

A project manager can serve as a mentor for the team. Take the time to fully explain the expectations. This eliminates rework, confusion, and frustration. Mentoring and teaching others the lessons that you have already learned allows your team to make better choices and build on your experience. This also allows members of your team in meeting expectations and helping them exceed their own sense of personal potential.

### Building relationships

Take the time to build relationships with your customers, clients, vendors, and other stakeholders is important. Getting to know your team members lets them know that you care about them as people, not just as employees. Dedicate time to check in with people. Pay attention to the insights they off you about their work style since their actions can inform how to most effectively interact with them. Ask about their lives beyond the project and follow up on those discussions later on to show your interest. When these relationships are fostered, you are all more invested in the success of your project.

### Controlling change

Projects change as you continue to understand the expectations and the needs of your stakeholders. As a project manager, you need to remain flexible and adjust to the stakeholders' needs. However, it is also important to protect your team from constant change and rework. A good way to do this is by documenting the initial expectations of the project and clearly identifying the changes being requested. It is also helpful to understand the budget and schedule impact of the changes and make sure that the stakeholders understand those impacts. As the project manager, you are responsible for protecting your team.

### Empowering your team

Giving your team the ability to work directly with the stakeholders and their teams lets them know that you trust and believe in their skills! One of the best things about empowering your team is getting fresh ideas and passionate employees willing to help find solutions to problems. Another way you can empower your team is by delegating responsibilities to them, allowing them to make some decisions for the project, and using their input in the planning and execution of the project. Effective mentoring often leads to more empowered teams.

### Communicating status and concerns

As a PM, communication is everything. With effective communication, you can work together with your team to find solutions to challenges. The project manager sets the tone for the project. Maintaining an open door policy and building trust within your team and among stakeholders - all while staying positive - will help the success of the project.

### Key Takeaway

These interpersonal responsibilities can be just as important to the success of your projects as your more concrete responsibilities, like scheduling and budgeting.

## A project manager's role within a team

A **Project Manager** is not often the direct manager of the people working on a project team. A project manager is someone who manages the tasks of a project. You will have a few teammates working with you on a project, you're probably not their day-to-day boss. Everyone on your team will have their own set of roles and responsibilities. Eah person will be an expert on their portion of the project, but no one will be an expert on every aspect of the project, and neither will the PM.

The project manager is not the expert on everything, but rather, the project manager is responsible for guiding the team and making sure they have the support that they need in order to complete the project.

In order for this to follow through:

- A Project Manager will need to hold the team members accountable by giving them ownership over specific pieces of the project.
- Then, the PM will need to ensure that issues and risks are tracked and visible, and be able to establish escalation paths. Escalation paths, you should know how you will communicate risks to the right people at the right time.
- Next, the Project manager will need to understand and help teammates adopt the right workflows and project management styles. As the PM, you will likely have the best idea of which style is best for the work.
- Finally, the project manager will need to collaborate with other teams at the organization to meet the requirements based on _project, scope, schedule, and budget_. In short, a project may not only affect your team, but other teams at the organization such as marketing or the finance team. So working with those teams to ensure that every is happy with the project outcomes.

## Working with cross-functional teams

A cross-functional team includes team members who have different backgrounds, types of expertise, and job functions. Even though these teams members have different skill sets, occupy different roles, and may even work in different departments, they are all working towards a common goal: the successful completion of your project.

### Managing cross-functional teams effectively requires the project manager to

- Clarify goals
- Get team members with the right skills
- Measure progress
- Recognize efforts

#### Clarify goals

With cross-functional teams, it is important to ensure that each member of the team understands their rolle, how they support each other, and the common goals of the project. It is vital to set clear goals for the team and make sure that the team understands those goals. Be direct and concise, avoiding extraneous details and explanations. When communicating task or project goals, make sure you define key items, such as budget, deadlines, quality requirements, or important resources. Encourage team members to ask questions and clarify information to ensure the tasks and project goals are understood. Your project may be competing against other priorities, so communicating clearly and often with your team - and vice versa - helps you identify any potential issues or concerns before they arise.

#### Get team members with the right skills

As a PM, you must help ensure that the team has the right people with the right skill sets needed for the project to succeed.

#### Measure progress

Make sure to show the team how much they have accomplished to help keep motivation. Take the time to measure and communicate the projects progress across the cross-functional team. Measuring can be done in many ways, including meeting key milestones, completing project tasks, and meeting project goals on time and within budget. Regularly communicate with your team members to check on their progress. Ask if they anticipate being finished on time. If not, ask how you can help them succeed. Keep track of the team's progress throughout the project by documenting when tasks and goals are completed and let team members know if the project is on track or not.Make sure you communicate successes, delays, or issues, to the team so they know how the project is progressing. Keeping everyone informed is essential to the project's success.

#### Recognize efforts

As a PM, it is your job to make sure that each member of the cross-functional team recognizes the value of their efforts each step of the way. Learn what makes your team members feel supported, giving and taking feedback, and being mindful of each individual's background, personal identifiers, and work style can help mediate some of the differences among team members.

### Cross-functional teams key Takeaway

Being able to communicate clearly with team members, clarify the goals of the project, get team members with the right skills, measure team progress, and recognize team members' efforts is an important part of the role as the project manager, and is key to the project's success.

## A day in the life of a project manager

Spends most of the days with produce and engineering counterparts talking a lot about strategy, updating status to key stakeholders, and trying to figure out what comes next for the product.

Project managers communicate with a lot of people in a day, a lot of different types of people, from engineers to product managers to partnerships, to sales and marketing, all of that's the same.

The biggest difference is the number of people to communicate with, and the complexity of the topics covered. Because of this, the PM needs to stay highly organized. This will result in your team being more organized in their thinking and their actions.

Find something that will help you stay organized. Usually lists.

The PM will have a stand up with the engineers for about 15 minutes to cover what was done the day before and what is being done the rest of the day. There is a quick check in around lunch to make sure that people are still on track or ran into any technical issues that might require a longer time to finish the task.

A good thing to keep in mind to keep moving is `pick it and stick it`. It's important to make a decision to get unstuck, follow through on that action, and learn some things and decide to take anew action once you've learned something.

Next would be resilience, if the PM and the team have taken a bad action, the PM and team will learn that one can learn and change their mind with new information.

[<---BACK](../googlePmCert.md)
