# Introduction: Utilizing resources and tools for project success

## Essential project resources

As a project manager, understanding your resource needs is crucial to achieving your goals. So during the initiation phase, it's important to ask yourself `what are the things we still need to acquire in order to complete our project?` Project resources usually include:

- Budget,
- People,
- Materials

You'll use tools to manage all those resources. As you think about the goals and the scope of the project, you figure out the different resources you'll need to meet those goals. It's important to figure out your resources before the project gets rolling. This makes it easy for everyone on your team to get their work done, and that's your job as a project manager. You won't be doing the work directly, but you'll support the people who do.

Figuring out resources early on also helps you avoid accidentally under staffing your project, which can seriously slow down team progress and eat away at the overall timeline. Even worse, if your'e not careful with your resource planning, you could wind up underestimating the budget. Meaning, you might no have enough money to purchase necessary materials, hire vendors, or support overtime requests. Planning your resources early is a great way to set your team up for success. Because when your teammates have what they need to do their work on time and on budget, they are better set up to meet the project's goals. Now, let's break down some of the resources that project managers typically work with.

First let's talk about budgets:

> ### Budget
>
> An estimate of the amount of money a project will cost to complete

Almost all project have budgets because they need funding for expenses, like buying the right materials or software, hiring vendors to complete jobs, or doing marketing once the project's done. During the initiation phase, you'll talk to the stakeholders and the people working on the project to figure out the tasks needed to get the project done. Here you might ask questions to help uncover hidden costs. For example,

- Are there any taxes on products that you need to account for?
- What about extra fees?

All this information will help you create a budget, which you can use to source and compare proposals from vendors, figure out upcoming costs, and track all the money moving in and out of your project. You'll often include the budget in the project charter, and the stakeholders review it for approval.

Talking about resources, we're also talking about the team of people who help execute the tasks of a project. For example, you, as the project manager are a resource. So is the marketing manager who might create advertisements for this new product. Other resources can include people outside of your company who have unique skills and can do certain tasks that people in your organization can't do personally.

Then, you have materials.

> ### Materials
>
> Materials are items you need to help get the project done.

For example, project materials might include the lumber needed to complete a construction project, okay? So you know that project resources include budget, people, and materials. How do you organize these resources?

That's actually a nice transition into our next topic which is: tools.

> ### Tools
>
> Aids that make it easier for a project manager or team to manage resources and organize work.

Tools help you do things like:

- Track tasks,
- Manage budgets,
- Collaborate with teammates.

There are all kinds of tools out there including productivity tools like Google Docs and work management software like Asana. Tools are essential for tracking progress, so you want to keep them top of mind at all phases of your project.

## Managing resources to get the job done

As we continue learning the tools and techniques that will help you succeed in project management, let's consider the importance of **project resources.** Project resources are who and what you depend on to complete a project, including budget, materials, and people. While each resource is a separate entity,they all depend on one another-your team cannot do the work without materials, and you cannot purchase materials without a budget. In this reading, we will discuss some key project resources and tips for managing them.

### Budget

Have you ever created a budget for yourself or your family? If you have, you know what a budget includes a wide variety of expenses. For example, a monthly personal budget can contain items that include anything from food to transportation costs to rent. With only a certain amount of funding to cover each expense, it is important to closely monitor your spending to avoid going over budget. If you go over in one category of your budget, you will impact the others and will need to make adjustments. As a project manager, you will take the same general approach with your project budget.

Common aspects of your project budget will include:

- Team: the cost of the people performing the work
- Services: any outside vendors helping your project
- Materials: any tangible items purchased to complete the project

Throughout your project management career, you will encounter various types of projects with a wide range of budgets. Some budgets will have no margin for error, whereas other budgets may be more flexible. Regardless of this variability, budget issues will inevitably arise, so it is important to make sure that the budget is aligned with the project scope and the stakeholders' asks.

### People

People are a vital resource on your project; you cannot complete your project on your own! You will need to rely on a strong team of people with a variety of skill sets and specialties to get the job done. As a project manager, make sure that you have commitment and buy-in on the number of hours it will take for your resources to complete their tasks. Additionally, you will find the best partners on a project are people who are aligned to the goals of the project or who are most interest in the project's work.

### Materials

Materials can be different on every project. For example, if you were working on anIT project, materials could include hard drives and computers to handle the coding efforts. You can also have materials that are intangible. For example, on the same IT project, online storage, or employee training may also be considered materials. It is important to account for any and all potential materials in order to execute a successful project with the right people and within budget.

### Key takeaway: Managing resources to get the job done

Your project resources include things like the budget, people, and materials. As a project manager, remembering that your resources are dependent on one another s key to understanding the function of each resource and determining how to manage all of them. Take the time to interview stakeholders and potential team members about what resources they think they will need in order to deliver the project. They may have an idea of materials they require that you may not have accounted for within the budget, for example, or can identify people with expertise that would make them an asset to the project.

[<---Back](../README.md)
