# The value of project documentation

It's your job to keep track of every new decision and use those decisions to create a plan, even if you're not the one making final decisions on major aspects of the project. There are lot of important decisions to keep track of, including everything from identifying project goals and deliverables to choosing the right people to add to a team. It's way to much for any one person to mentally keep track of.

It's also important information for everyone on the team to be aware of; not just the project manager. If a decision affects a member of the team's task, they'll eed to know about it, right? That's why documentation is such an important part of a project' manager's role. While your team may work deeply on specific areas of the project, you might be the only person on the team who is aware of and communicating across all the different areas of the project.

> ## Clear and consistent documentation can ensure transparency and clear communication

Documentation helps set the stage for the project. It communicates the answers to key questions. For example:

- What problem are you trying to solve?
- What are the project goals?
- What are the scope and deliverables?
- Who are the project's stakeholders?
- What resources does the team need to complete their work?

This is all crucial information for anyone who's working on a project, regardless of their role. Documentation also helps preserve decisions made early on in the project and can serve as a reference point for team members who might join later in the project life cycle. It's your job to ensure that this information is easily accessible through some kind of formal documentation, like an e-mail, a presentation, or a digital document.

> ### Documenting decisions can help you uncover tasks, timelines, or costs

Documenting decisions can help you uncover tasks, timelines, or costs you hadn't previously considered. And lastly, this process provides a historical record that can be reviewed at the end of your project. You can apply the lessons you've learned in the future.

# Project proposals and charters 101

Two common types of documentation you could use to keep track of details and keep your stakeholders informed. These are: the project proposal and the project charter.

> ## Project proposal
>
> A form of documentation that persuades a stakeholder to begin a project

A project proposal is a form of documentation that comes at the very beginning of the project. This document's purpose is to persuade stakeholders that a project should begin. And typically, a senior organizational leader creates the proposal. So you might not need to worry about creating the proposal, but you will have to keep track of the proposal's progress.

The project proposal is a great starting point to help you understand the desired goals and impact. A proposal may be a formal document, a presentation, or even a simple email to get others on board with the idea.

> ## Project charter
>
> A formal document that clearly defines the project and outlines the necessary details to reach its goals.

A project charter helps you get organized, set up a framework for what needs to be done, and communicate those details to others. A project proposal is created earlier in the project life cycle than the project charter. The proposal kicks off the initiation phase by influencing and persuading the company to move forward with the project.

> ## The project proposal kicks off the initiation phase by influencing and persuading the company to move forward with the project.

The project charter serves a similar purpose and often comes at the end of the initiation phase. However, its goal is to more clearly define the key details of the project.

> ## The project charter's goal is to more clearly define the key details of the project.

Another difference between these two documents is that a charter will often serve as a point of reference throughout the life of a project. The proposal is only used at the earlier stages.

> ## The project charter makes clear that the benefits of the project outweigh the costs of the project

The project charter makes clear that the benefits of the project outweigh the costs. As you learned earlier in this course, there are a few questions you might ask yourself when performing a cost benefit analysis. That includes questions like:

## Cost Benefit Analysis

- Business value created
  - What value will this project create?
- Money saved
  - How much money could this project save my organization?
- Time invested
  - How much time will people have to spend on this project?

You'll include the answers to these questions in your charter. Including this type of information ensure that you and your stakeholders agree on the project value.

> ## Project charters also helps ensure that you and your stakeholders agree on the details of the project

The charter also helps ensure that you and your stakeholders agree on the details of the project. Project charter approval means that management is supportive, and it's also a key step to ensure that the project matches the needs of the organization. After the stakeholders and project sponsor have reviewed and approved the project charter, you now have the authority to move forward with the project. Project charters can be formatted in a few ways and can contain different information depending on the project and the organization. The information in a charter might also be tailored to its audience or the needs of specific stakeholders. For example, if your writing a project charter for a stakeholder who is a marketing executive, the charter might include information about how the project will impact the organization's brand. Or if the stakeholder is a chief technology officer, the charter might include information on the cost of engineering resources needed to maintain the project.

> ## Creating a project charter is a best practice to ensure that everyone agrees on how to move forward before entering the planning phase

Regardless of the format or the audience, creating a project charter is a best practice to ensure that everyone agrees on how to move forward before entering the planning phase. The project charter is a living document.

This means that it can evolve as the project progresses. As the project manager, you'll review and refine the charter throughout the process.

[<---Back](../README.md)
