# Evaluating tools to meet project needs

## Utilizing tools for effective project management

As a project manager, tools are some of the most helpful resources you have at your disposal. They're essential for tracking progress, so its important to keep them top of mind throughout the entire project.

There are lots of different tools out there, and you'll learn more about them later. As a reminder, tools are aids that make it easier for a project manager or team to manage resources and organize work.

> Tools can help track detailed information about all kinds of tasks and make it easy to communicate with lots of different people.

They're useful because they can help you track details information about all kinds of tasks, and they make it easy to communicate with lots of different people. Effective communication and tracking are huge parts of a project manager's day-to-day responsibilities. The project manager job would be much tougher without help from collaboration tools like e-mail or digital documents created in Google Docs or Microsoft Word. Let's imagine this in the context of our project at Office Green. As a lead project manager, you have tons of information about the company's plan to provide office-friendly plants to top clients. But what would happen if you wrote every project detail ona whiteboard instead of a shared online document? Every member of your team would have to stop by your desk to get the latest information, and that's definitely not the most efficient use of anyone's time. But if you store this information in easily-accessible online documents, you save everyone on the team time, energy, and a major headache.

Today's tools have made it so much easier to share information with teammates. Even better with project management tools, information sharing goes both ways. That means team members can also easily update you on their progress without the need for extra meetings or phone calls. How great is that?

> ## Project management tools help you
>
> - Track task deadlines
> - Provide visibility to others
> - Manage a budget
> - Create helpful diagrams
> - Manage contracts

When you choose the right tool for a project, you make it easy for teammates to let you know if a task is on schedule or if it's delayed, which lets you quickly see how any changes might affect the rest of the project. Project management tools increase visibility and transparency for everyone, including stakeholders. You can use a variety of tools to accomplish many different things, like tracking progress on tasks, deliverables, and milestones. Tools can also help you manage a budget, build helpful charts and diagrams, manage contracts and licenses, and keep stakeholders informed. Tools can be straightforward, like digital spreadsheets or documents, or they can be more sophisticated, like scheduling and work management software. It's important to think about the needs of the project when choosing which to use.

One thing to keep in mind is that if you choose a more sophisticated tool, your teammates and stakeholders will need some time to get familiar with it. For small projects, that might be more trouble than it's worth. So for small projects, a straight forward tool might be more effective. But if a project has a big scope, then it might be worth the team's time to learn and ultimately work with a more sophisticated project management tool.

You should also keep in mind that sometimes you won't have a choice about the types of tools you use. If an organization has already decided to use a specific tool, then you will need to work with what they give you. It's all about remaining flexible.

## Introducing new tools to a team

Project management tools and process are always evolving. In this reading, we will discuss the importance of choosing the right tools for a project and the implications of introducing new tools to your team.

As a project manager, it is important to be open to implementing new tools that may be beneficial to a project's outcome. You will experience change in lots of forms throughout your project's life cycle, and navigating change is essential. But if you choose to implement a tool that your team is unfamiliar with-especially if you decide to roll it out midway through a project-your team may be hesitant. People embrace change differently, particularly if the change will directly impact their routine and the way they work. Simply put: Change can be met with resistance.

Before you introduce a new tools to your team, you should be sure that this change is actually going to benefit the project, and ensure that those involved in your project understand the benefits of this change. Demonstrating to your teammates and stakeholders that you understand the tools and have evaluated its competency will help build trust, especially if this new tools is replacing an existing tool. Taking the time to introduce the new tools to your team members will also demonstrate that you have the best interest of the team in mind-not just the success of the project.

Here are som eimportant considerations and keys to successfully introducing new tools:

- **Discuss the tool early and often, if possible**. The team should not feel blindsided by a new change. Make sure they know the change is coming as early as possible. This will help them prepare for an introduction or migration to the new tools.
- **Ask for feedback from key stakeholders.** You could get great feedback on features that you may have overlooked without asking for their expertise. You can solicit this feedback by requesting their input about functionality or have them list features in order of priority. The key is to create an opportunity for stakeholders to provide their feedback and allow you to incorporate their feedback into next steps.
- **Involve the key stakeholders in demonstrations as you get closer to making the final decision on the project tracking tool.** You will be able to leverage key stakeholders' acceptance by letting them test the product or sign up for a trial run. It is also important to make sure that the tools is actually going to meet the mark and provide a meaningful change for the project. You may want to pull in key users from your team to test and familiarize themselves with the tool prior to rolling it out. This will allow the team to get on board with your plans or discuss their concerns beforehand. This will also highlight in-house experts for future training, assistance, and implementation.
- **Ensure the tool is fully functional before the team is introduced to it.** Whenever possible, hold off from introducing the tool if it still has any issues. Make sure the tool is accessible for all users. Keep in mind, your team members may resist a tool that doesn't live up to how it is supposed to function. This will impact implementation and acceptance fairly significantly, so put your best tool forward!
- **Set up training for the tool as needed before you ask the team to actually use it.** Everyone has different levels of comfort with different tools. It is your job as the project manager to ensure that each team members' needs are addressed. Setting up training also helps create positive first impressions, which will lead to higher productivity and quicker, more successful implementation and acceptance.

Remember, some pushback is normal, but successful project managers should take the steps to prepare and mitigate any friction for their team when possible.

**Pro tip:** If time allows, plan for a period of transition if you are replacing an existing tool. It is common to allow both tools to operate during this period. You will need to "sunset", or retire, the existing tool eventually, but allowing for a period of transition between using the old tool and the new tool can help stakeholders and team members feel more at ease and give them time to gain familiarity with the new tool. Be prepared for productivity to be impacted as the team transitions from one tool to another.

[<---Back](../README.md)
