# Code 301 Class 08 Reading Notes

## [API Design Best Practices](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/best-practices/api-design)

1. **What does REST stand for?** Representational State Transfer
2. **REST APIs are designed around a resouce** which are any kind of object, data, or service that can be access by the client.
3. **What is an identifer of a resource? Give an example.** a URI that inquely identifies that resource
   - `https://adventure-works.com/orders/1`
4. **What are the most common HTTP verbs?** `GET, POST, PUT, PATCH`, AND `DELETE`
5. **What should the URIs be based on?** Nouns, the resource.
6. **Give an example of a good URI.** `https://adventure-works.com/orders`
7. **What does it mean to have a ‘chatty’ web API? Is this a good or a bad thing?** Web APIs that expose a large number of small resources. It's good to have a balance between small and large, small enough that there isn't a large load, and not to large that you run the risk of increased latency of a request.
8. **What status code does a successful GET request return?** HTTP status code 200 (OK)
9. **What status code does an unsuccessful GET request return?** HTTP status code 404 (Not Found)
10. **What status code does a successful POST request return?** HTTP status code 201 (CREATED)
11. **What status code does a successful DELETE request return?** HTTP status code 204 (Not Created)

## Things I want to know more about

I'm getting the verbs and the codes behind the verbs. But would love to be able to put the code in a meaningful way where it's posted, so it can be patched and not deleted.

[<---BACK](README.md)
