# Determining Project Goals and deliverables

To set up a project for success, and to make your job easier, you want to figure out what needs to be done before you actually get started. You need to define exactly what your goals and deliverables are, so that you'll be able to tell your team members what to do. You need a clear picture of what you're trying to accomplish, how you're going to accomplish it, and how you know when it has been accomplished.

> ## Project Goal <br>
>
> The desired outcome of the project

The project goal is what you've been asked to do and what you're trying to achieve.

> Example:<br>
> The goal of the Office Green project might be to increase revenue by 5% through a new service called Plant Pals that offers desk plants to top customers by the end of the year.

Goals are important because they give you a road map to your destination. Without a clear goal in mind, how can you know where to go or how to get there?

One of the biggest differences between what makes a good goals and a not so good goal is how well it's defined. The goal to increase the Office Green revenue by 5% is a well-defined goal because they tell you what you're trying to achieve. The goal also tell you how to do what you've been asked to do. In this case, its through a new survive offering. The goal clarifies the goal even further by saying "to increase by 5%". Now we know where we are going. Well defined goals are both specific and measurable. They give you a clear sense of what you are trying to accomplish. Really great goals have even more detail.

When you start a project, take time to review your goals and make sure they're well defined. To do this, you might need to get more information from your stakeholders:

- Talk to them about their vision for the project.
- Ask how this aligns to the company's larger goals and mission.

By the end of that conversation, you and your stakeholders should agree to support the projects goals in order to avoid running into issues later on.

Make sure that before you start your project, you, your stakeholders, and your team are all clear on the project goals so that you know you're making the right kind of progress.

Once you have the goals nailed down, it's time to examine the project deliverables.

> ## Project Deliverables <br>
>
> - The products or services that are created for the customer, client, or project sponsor
> - What gets produces or presented at the end of a task, event, or process
> - Help quantify and realize the impact of the project

The Office Green project goal to increase revenues could have these two deliverables: launching the plant service and a finished website that highlights the new kinds of plants being offered.

This is considered a deliverable because they describe tangible outputs that show stakeholders how additional revenues will be generated. There are all sorts of project deliverable examples. A common one is a report. When a goal is reached, you can visible see the results documented in the chart, graph, or presentation. Deliverables help us quantify and realize the impact of the project.

Just like needing well-defined goals, you need well-defined deliverables for pretty much the same reasons. Deliverables are usually decided upfront with the stakeholders or clients involved in the project. They hold everyone accountable and are typical of a big part of achieving the goal.

Make sure to ask questions about what the deliverable should be and have have everyone share their vision and expectations of the deliverables so that you're all on the same page.

[<---Back](../README.md)
