# How to set SMART goals

> **S**pecific <br> > **M**easurable <br> > **A**ttainable <br> > **R**elevant <br> > **T**ime-bound <br>

You will need to be able to identify and clarify them as needed, and that's where the SMART method can be a valuable tool. If your goal is not specific, you'll have trouble figuring out how long it should take to complete and whether or not you've accomplished it.

> Example: <br>
>
> If the goal is simply to improve customer service response time, that's not very specific. It does tell you what you want to achieve in general, but it doesn't say anything else. If you improve response time by one percent, is that enough? If after five years response time finally goeas up, is that enough? How about if only have of your staff improves their response times, but the other half stays the same.

**Specific** goals should answer at least **_two_** of the following questions:

- What do I want to accomplish?
- Why is this a goal?
- Does it have a specific reason, purpose, or benefit?
- Who is involved? & Who is the recipient?
  - Employees, customer, the community at large?
- Where should the goal be delivered?
- To what degree?

Next, we want to set goals that are measurable, meaning we can determine that they were objectively met. Measuring is not only a way for people to track progress, but also a tool to help people stay motivated.

You can tell the goal is **measurable** by asking:

- How much?
- How many?
- How will I know when it's accomplished?

Sometimes the success of a goal can be measure with a simple yes or no. Did you learn to play the guitar, yes or no?

You will need to measure most of the goals you have with metrics:

> ## Metrics <br>
>
> What you use to measure something, like numbers or figures.

At Office Green, the project goal is to increase revenue by 5%. In this case, revenue is the metric.

> ## Benchmarks <br>
>
> Points of reference

Consider benchmarks or points of reference to make sure you're choosing accurate metrics. For instance, if your overall goal is to increase revenue, you can look at last year's data as a benchmark for deciding how much to increase revenue this year. If last year's revenue increased by 3%, then an increase by 5% in a booming economy would be a reasonable goal for this year.

So, the goal is specific and measurable, but is it attainable? Typically you want goals that are a little challenging to encourage growth, otherwise, what's the point of the goal if nothing's going to change. However, you don't want it to be too extreme or you'll never reach it. You'll have failed before you even started. Aim to find a balance between the two extremes.

> ## Attainable <br>
>
> - Can it reasonably be reach based on the metrics?
> - How can it be accomplished?

A clue to helping you figure out if your goal is attainable, is to ask: `how can this be accomplished?` Break down the goal into smaller parts and see if it makes sense.

Businesses usually conduct quarterly reviews. So let's assume that increase is expected to occur over the course of a year or four quarters. In order to meet the goal, you need to see an increase of at least 1.25% each quarter.

> ## Relevant <br>
>
> - Does the goal makes sense?
> - Is the goal worthwhile?
> - Is it the right time?

Think about how the goal lines up with other goals, priorities and values. Ask whether the goal seems worthwhile. Does the effort involve balance out of the benefits? Does it match your organizations' other needs and priorities? Everyone, from the client, the project team, and the people who will ultimately use the product, need to feel like the goal is worth supporting.

Both the amount of time the project will take, as well as the larger economic and social contexts can have big impacts. There might be a budget to complete the project now, but **`will the company be able to sustain the project over time?` `Is there an audience that will continue to use the product or service once it's delivered`**. Once these questions get answers, you should have a clear goal to help steer a project. If you still don't feel confident about the project's goals, keep digging. It's okay to ask questions if you have doubts. Communicate your concerns with the project senior stakeholders and your direct supervisor if you have one. Once you are feeling good about the project being relevant and attainable, and you've made sure it's measurable, and has the specifics to keep you and your team focused, time to look at the final item on the check list, is it time-bound.

> ## Time-bound <br>
>
> Has a deadline or clear time frame

Deadlines give you a way to track your progress, otherwise, you may never reach your goal or never even get started. Time and metrics often go hand in hand, because time can also be used as a metric. Making your goal time-bound gives you a way to break down how much needs to be accomplished over time.

[<---Back](../README.md)
