# SMART goals: Making goals meaningful

> - **Specific:** The objective has no ambiguity for the project team to misinterpret
> - **Measurable:** Metrics help the project team determine when the objective is met.
> - **Attainable:** The project team agrees the objective is realistic.
> - **Relevant:** The goal fits the organization's strategic plan and supports the project charter.
> - **Time-bound:** The project team documents a date to achieve the goal.

## Measurable

Having measurable goals allows you to assess the success of your project based on quantifiable or tangible metrics, such as dollar amounts, number of outputs, quantities, etc. Measurable goals are important because the leave little room for confusion around expectations from stakeholders.

## Defining a SMART goal

Imagine you are looking to make a career change, and you set a goal to complete a Google Career Certificate. You can **measure** the success of this goal because after completing the entire program, you will receive a certificate-a tangible outcome.

In this example, your **specific** goal is to attain a Google Career Certificate. You can make this goal **attainable** by deciding that you will complete one course per month. This goal is **relevant** because it supports your desire to make a career change. Finally, you can make this goal **time-bound** by deciding that you will complete the program within 6 months.

After defining each of these components, your SMART goal then becomes: Obtain a Google Career Certificate by taking one course per month within the next 6 months.

## Key takeaway: SMART Goals

Determining metrics can be extremely helpful in capturing statuses, successes, delays, and more in a project. As a project manager, identifying meaningful metrics can help move the project toward its goal. Additionally, by defining each element of a project goal to make it SMART, you can determine what success means for that goal and how to achieve it.

# Introduction to OKRs

> <div align="center">
> Objectives <br>
> + <br>
> Key Results
> </div>

OKR's combine a _goal_ and a _metric_ to determine a measurable outcome.

They not only state clearly what the goal is, they provide specific details that allow you to measure the success of the goal. One way to think about OKRs is that they separate the different components of SMART goals and clarify them even further, rather than grouping everything int on statement.

## Objective:

- Defines what needs to be achieved
- Describes a desired outcome
  - Examples:
    - Increase in customer retention
    - Improve the employee onboarding process.

## Key Results:

- The _measurable outcomes_ that define when the objective has been met.
  - Examples:
    - Objective: improve customer retention
    - Key Result: achieve a 90% customer satisfaction rating by the end of the first quarter

Recall that one of the SMART criteria is attainability, which means it's practical to achieve the goal.

Key results, however, should be a little more ambitious.

## Objectives

- Similar to goals
- Describe a desired outcome

## Key Results

- Define how you'll know whether or not you've met your objective

## OKR Levels

- Company/Organization
- Department/Team
- Project

> Office Green Company-Level Objective Example: <br>
>
> Increase customer retention by adapting to the changing workplace environment

> Office Green Company-Level Key Results Example: <br>
>
> - 95% of phone, chat, and email customer support tickets are resolved during the first contact
> - Top 3 most requested new offerings for distributed office environments are in pilot by the end of the second quarter
> - Sales and support channels are available 24/7 by the end of the year

For example, the **company-level** _key result_ "sales and support channels are available 24/7 by the end of the year", could lead to a related sales department **objective** like: increase the sales team presence nationwide. And the **key result**: new sales offices are open in 10 cities by the end of the year.

Project-level OKRs are set during the initiation phase to help define measurable project goals. They're tracked throughout the planning and execution stages to measure project success.

`Project-level OKRs need to align with and support both company and department-level OKRs.`

> Project Objective for Plant Pals: <br>
>
> ## Objective: <br>
>
> Enroll existing customers in the Plant Pals service

> ## Key Result: <br>
>
> 25% of existing customers sign up for the Plant Pals pilot

## Recap: OKRs

- OKR stands for **Objectives** and **Key Results**. They combine a _goal_ and a _metric_ to determine a measurable outcome.
- Objectives define what needs to be achieved and describe a desired outcome.
- Key Results define how you will measure the outcome of your objective.
- Company-level OKRs are shared across an organization so that everyone can align and focus their efforts to help the company reach its goals.
- Project-level OKRs help define measurable projects goals. They need to align with and support both company and department-level OKRs.

# Creating OKRs for your project

## What are OKRs?

OKR stands for objectives and key results. They combine a goal and a metric to determine a measurable outcome.

| **Objectives**                      | **Key results**                                                                  |
| ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| - Defines what needs to be achieved | - The measurable outcomes that objectively define whe the objective has been met |
| - Describes a desired outcome       |                                                                                  |

Company-wide OKRs are used to set an ultimate goal for an entire organization, whole team, department, and project-level OKRs describe the focused results each group will need to achieve in order to support the organization.

## OKRs and project management

As a project manager, OKRs can help you expand upon project goals and further clarify the deliverables you'll need from the project to accomplish those goals. Project-level OKRs help establish the appropriate scope for your team so that you can say "no" to requests that may get in the way of them meeting their objectives. You can also create and use project-level OKRs to help motivate your team since OKRs are intended to challenge you to push past what's easily achievable.

## Creating OKRs for your project

### Set your objectives

Project objectives should be aspirational, aligned with organizational goals, action-oriented, concrete, and significant. Consider the vision you and your stakeholders have for your project and determine what you want the project team to accomplish in 3-6 months.

### Examples:

- Build the most secure data security software
- Continuously improve web analytics and conversions
- Provide a top-performing service
- Make a universally-available app
- Increase market reach
- Achieve top sales among competitors in the region.

Strong **objectives** meet the following criteria. They are:

- Aspirational
- Aligned with organizational goals
- Action-oriented
- Concrete
- Significant

To help shape each objective, ask yourself and your team:

- Does the objective help in achieving the project's overall goals?
- Does the objective align with company and departmental OKRs?
- Is the objective inspiring and motivational?
- Will achieving the objective make a significant impact?

### Develop key results

Next, add 2-3 key results for each objective. Key results should be time-bound. They can be used to indicate the amount of progress to achieve within a shorter period or to define whether you've met your objective at the end of the project. They should also challenge you and your team to stretch yourselves to achieve more.

### Examples:

- X% new signups within first quarter post launch
- Increase advertiser spend by X% within the first two quarters of the year
- New feature adoption is at least X% by the end of the year
- Maximum 2 critical bugs are reported monthly by customers per Spring
- Maintain newsletter unsubscribe rate at X% this calendar year

Strong **key results** meet the following criteria:

- Results-oriented-**not** a task
- Measurable and verifiable
- Specific and time-bound
- Aggressive yet realistic

To help shape your key results, ask yourself and your team the following:

- What does success mean?
- What metrics would prove that we've successfully achieved the objective?

## OKR development best practices

Here are some best practices to keep in mind when writing OKRs:

- Think of your objectives as being motivational and inspiring and your key results as being tactical and specific. The objective describes what you want to do and the key results describe how you'll know you did it.
- As a general rule, try to develop around 2--3 key results for each objective.
- Be sure to document your OKRs and link to them in your project plan.

## OKRs versus Smart goals

Earlier in this lesson, we crafted Smart goals for your project. While SMART goals and OKRs have some similarities, there are key differences, as well. The following article describes how SMART goals and OKRs are similar, how the differ, and when you might want to use one or the other:

- [Understanding the Unique Utility of OKRs vs. Smart Goals](https://www.smartsheet.com/content/okr-vs-smart-goals)

To learn more how OKRs work to help project managers define and create measurable project goals and deliverables, check out the following resources:

- [Google's OKR playbook](https://www.whatmatters.com/resources/google-okr-playbook)
- [Planning Company goals](https://asana.com/guide/examples/project-management/goals-okrs-planning)
- [OKRs and SMART goals: Whats the difference?](https://www.whatmatters.com/resources/okrs-smart-goals-difference-between)
- [OKRs and KPIs: What They Are and How They Work Together](https://www.reflektive.com/blog/okrs-and-kpis-what-they-are-and-how-they-work-together/)
- [OKR Examples](https://business.adobe.com/blog/basics/okr-examples)
- [OKR TED Talk](https://www.whatmatters.com/articles/ted-talk) video (John Doerr, the founder of OKRs, explains why the secret to success is setting the right goals.)

[<---Back](../README.md)
