# Defining project scope

## Determining a project's scope

Project scope includes the boundaries of a project.

> Project Scope: <br>
>
> "An agreed upon understanding as to what is included or excluded from a project"
>
> <div align="right">
> ~ Google Company Definition ~
> </div>

Scope helps ensure that your project is clearly defined and mapped out. That means knowing exactly who the project will be delivered to and who will be using the end result of the project. You also need a firm understanding of the project's complexity. Is it straightforward with an easily manageable list of tasks? Or will it require extensive research, multiple rounds of approvals, and a large-scale production process that will take years to complete.

Scope also includes the project timeline, budget, and resources. You need to clearly define these so that you can make sure you're working within those boundaries and what's actually possible for the project to work. Poorly-defined scope or major changes to your scope can cause changes to the budget, timeline, or even final outcome of the project.

Talk to your sponsors and stakeholders, to understand what their goals are, and find out what is, and this is really important, what is not included in the project.

### Additional Questions

- Where did the project come from?
- Why is it needed?
- What is the project expected to achieve? - What does the project sponsor have in mind?
- Who approves the final results?

For timing, defining project scope should happen during the initial planning stage. You want to start figuring out the scope early on so that everyone can agree to the same set of expectations. It will help mitigate the risks of big changes down the line.

Although you can always adjust the scope as planning continues, if you need to. Once you understand your project scope, you want to document all the details so that anyone can refer back to it throughout the life cycle of the project.

## Recap Determining a projects scope

A clearly defined scope describes all the details of a project and regulates what can be added or removed as it progresses. While it's ultimately the project manager's responsibility to monitor the project and make sure all the work and resources fall within its scope, team members and stakeholders can be encouraged to do their part by focusing on the task that are the most important to reaching the project's goal.

# Gathering information to define scope

## Asking scope-defining questions

Imagine that while working in a restaurant management group, your manager calls and asks you to `"update the dining space,"` then quickly hangs up the phone without providing further instruction. In this initial handoff from the manager, you are missing a lot of information. How do you even know what to ask?

Let's quickly recap the concept of scope. The scope provides the boundaries for your project. You define the scope to help identify necessary resources, resource costs, and a schedule for the project.

In the situation we just described, here are some questions you might ask your manager in order to get the information you need to define the scope of the project.

### Stakeholders

- How did you arrive at the decision to update the dining space?
- Did the request originate from the restaurant owner, customers, or other stakeholders?
- Who will approve the scope for the project?

### Goals

- What is the reason for updating the dining space?
- What isn't working in the current dining space?
- What is the end goal of this project?

### Deliverables

- Which dining space is being updated?
- What exactly needs to be updated?
- Does the dining space need a remodel?

### Resources

- What materials, equipment, and people will be needed?
- Will we need to hire contractors?
- Will we need to attain a floor plan and building permits?

### Budget

- What is the budget for this project? Is it fixed or flexible?

### Schedule

- How much time do we have to complete the project?
- When does the project need to be completed?

### Flexibility

- How much flexibility is there?
- What is the highest priority: hitting the deadline, sticking to the budget, or making sure the result meets all the quality targets?

## Key takeaway Gathering information to define scope

Taking the time to ask questions and ensure that you understand the scope of the project will help reduce expenses, rework, frustration, and confusion. Make sure you understand the _who_, _what_, _when_, _where_, _why_, and _how_ as it applies to the scope. If you are missing any of that information, focus your questions on those elements. The initiation phase of the project sets the foundation for the project, so ensuring that you understand the scope and expectations during this stage is essential.

# Monitoring and maintaining a project's scope

Tasks that are included in the project are called **In-Scope**.

> ## In-scope <br>
>
> Tasks that are included in the project plan and contribute to the project's goal

Tasks that are are not included are called **Out-of-scope**.

> ## Out-of-scope <br>
>
> Tasks that are not included in the project plan and don't contribute to the project's goal

It's your job as a project manager to set and maintain firm boundaries for your project so that your team can stay on track. For example, if the copywriters or designers of the Plant Pals catalog, came up with the idea to expand the type of plants being offered to top customers, you would have to point out that their suggestion is out-of-scope and would take extra time and add to your budget costs.

As you progress through the project life cycle, you're going to encounter unexpected challenges or have new details or ideas brought to your attention that could impact your project's success.

> ## Scope creep <br>
>
> Changes, growth, and uncontrolled factors that affect a project's scope at any point after the project begins

Scope creep is a common problem, and it's not always easy to control. Ti's one that we struggle with on every single project. It can happen on any project, in any industry.

Imagine you're working in a tech company and your project involves working with designers and engineers to update the language icons' design on a mobile keyboard app for a smartphone. While the team is making the update, they realize that the search icon and the voice input icon also need a design refresh. These are very small features, and while technically not in-scope, the team feels it would take minimal effort and provide lots of value. So they go ahead and make the updates.

During a stakeholder review, it's pointed out that there is a keyboard in English, but no keyboards for other languages,and the suggestions is made to design additional keyboards. At this point, the project's scope is in danger of expanding from a fairly simple icon update to a complex rollout of multiple keyboard layouts. Adding the keyboards would impact the team's timelines, causing the project to take longer to finish. It would also impact resourcing, because you would need to hire more people or existing team members would have to work overtime. And it would increase the budget, since the team did not anticipate costs for extra working hours or keyboard translations.

This is just one example of scope creep. Sometimes it's subtle ("Just design one or two more icons!") or more obvious ("Hey, can you tack on designing keyboards for other languages?") By identifying scope creep and being proactive, you protect your project and your project team.

To help you combat scope creep, it's good to know that there are two major sources from which it comes: external and internal.

> ## Sources of scope creep <br>
>
> - External
>   - Easier to recognize
> - Internal

Example of external scope creep; if you're working on a project with one main customer, the customer might request changes, or the business environment around you might shift, or the underlying technology you're using might change.

> ## External scope creep <br>
>
> - Customer requests
> - Environment shifts
> - Changes in technology

While you can't control everything that happens, there are some useful tips to keep in mind. First, make sure the stakeholders have visibility into the project. You want them to know the details of what's going to be produced, what resources are required, how much it will cost, and how much time it'll take. Also, get clarity on the requirements and ask for constructive criticism of the initial product proposal.

It's important to get this information before any contracts are signed. Be sure to set ground rules and expectations for stakeholder involvement once the project gets started. Come to an agreement on each of your roles and responsibilities during execution and status reviews.

Once you're clear on the project scope, come up with a plan for how to deal with out-of-scope requests. Agree on who can make formal change requests and how those requests will be evaluated, accepted, and performed. And finally, be sure to get these agreements in writing. This way, you'll always have documentation to point if you, a stakeholder, or the customer have a disagreement down the line. One of the leading causes of external scope creep is not being clear on the requirements before defining the scope and getting formal approval to move forward with the project.

This is where those specific and measurable goals and deliverables come into play. If the requirements aren't specific and if you haven't agreed on the project's processes, deliverables, and milestones, then you're almost guaranteed to be dealing with scope creep once the project begins

> ## Solutions <br>
>
> - Make project plans visible
> - Get clarity on project requirements
> - Set ground rules and expectations for stakeholder involvement
> - Create a plan for dealing with out-of-scope requests
> - Put your agreements and plans in writing

Internal sources of scope creep are trickier to spot and harder to control. This kind of creep comes from members of the project team who suggests or even insist on process or product changes or improvements. It's possible that a product developer will justify a decision on the grounds of making the product better, even though it's going to cost more, or a team lead might decide that a certain process is more efficient without realizing the impact the change in process will have on other team members tasked with different parts of the project.

What you need to make clear to your team is that any change outside of the project scope comes off the bottom line, threatens the schedule, and increases risks. There are no small impacts to project scope. Any time a team member task on an unplanned task, more is lost than just the time spent working on that task. It's your responsibility as the project manager to maintain the limits of the project.

The best defense is to know the details of your project in and out so you're always prepared with the most appropriate response to a new idea or request.

## Recap Monitoring and maintaining a project's scope

Monitor your project's scopes and protect it at all costs. Even the mot minor change can mean major risks to your project's success.

> ## Internal scope creep <br>
>
> - Product improvements
> - Processes changes

[<---Back](../README.md)
