# Measuring a project's success

## Launching and landing a project

Delivering the final result of your project to the client or user is what's called a project launch.

> ### Launch
>
> Delivering the final result of your project to the client or user

The real deciding factor of project success is when you put the final outcome to the test. Landing is when you actually measure the success of your project using the success criteria established at the outset of the project.

> ### Landing
>
> Measuring the success of your project using the success criteria established at the outset of the project

This is a crucial part of goal setting that is often overlooked in the initiation phase. For example, think about taking a trip on an airplane. It's not enough for the pilot to be able to get the plan off the ground. To arrive safely at your destination, they've got to know how to land.

There is a way to measure and help you ensure the success of your project. It's called success criteria, and if you can manage to follow it through the life cycle of your project, you'll ultimately have a smooth landing.

The success criteria includes all the specific details of your goals and deliverables, and it can be a guide so you know whether you've accomplished what you set out to do.

Success criteria will set standards for how your project will be judged.

## Don't forget to land: Measure project success

It is important to remember that even when your project is out in the world, your work isn't complete. When working ona project, the goal isn't simply to launch it, but to land it. Landings occur once your project achieves a measure of success. As project managers, landings are what we strive for and what we celebrate. They are the ultimate reward for all of our effots.

### Launching vs. landing a project

In project management, a project "launching" means you have delivered the final results of the project to the client or user. You can't solely base project success on when the client accepts the project, though. Your work on a project won't be complete until you "land" it by thoroughly measure the results. This is when the **success criteria** and the metrics you defined initially when setting SMART goals will come in handy.

Team should be clear on that they are trying to accomplish, beyond just launching something to users. Will your project increase retention? Will your project speed up a product feature? Depending on the product situation, the answers will differ, but it is important that your team aligns and works toward the same measurable goal.

### Launch first, land later

Launch the product and make sure the project has landed by checking later to measure the metrics to the projected goals set earlier.

### Launch and forget

Shouldn't forget to land, but this is something that is easy to do. A project landing shouldn't create more hurdles. If done correctly, a landing creates greater alignment within the teams on the end results you all desire, and it gives everybody on the team better visibility on how to achieve success.

## Key takeaway: Don't forget to land: Measure project success

Launching your project to the client can be a very big moment. You've handed over the project and now you can take a step back and breath. Make sure to land the project. Look over notes, talk with the team, meet with the client, and remember to return the intended deliverables and metrics to help measure success.

## Defining success criteria

> ### Success Criteria
>
> - Tells you whether or not the project was successful
> - Specific details of project goals, deliverables, requirements, and expectations
> - The standards by which the project will be judged once it's been delivered to stakeholders

Defining success criteria also clarifies for your team what they're trying to accomplish beyond just launching something to users. Is it to increase customer satisfaction with the service so they can continue to purchase more products? Enhance an existing feature to retain customers? Depending on the project, the answers will be different. But, it's important that a team is aligned and working towards a shared goal. Sometimes forcing the conversation and clarifying what the end result looks like can bring to light questions and areas of disagreement.

Remember the measurable part of SMART goals. One of the questions to ask when making your goals measurable is: How will I know when it is accomplished? The same question applies to your project: How will you know when it's done? In this case, you want to ask: How will I know when it's successfully accomplished? You can measure to determine your project success ina similar way to measuring a goal.

> ### Determining Project Success
>
> - Identify the measurable aspects of your project
> - Get clarity from stakeholders on the project requirements and expectations

You will want to ask questions with the people involved with the project, such as:

- Who ultimately says whether or not the project is successful?
- What criteria will be measured to determine success?
- What's the success of this project based on?

Once you've collected clarifying information, document and share all of it so that you, your team, and your stakeholders can refer to it later.

You need a process for measure success from start to finish throughout the entire project life cycle. This way, you can make adjustments and ensure success by the time you're ready to land. There are many metrics you can use, and for some products, it will make sense to use more than one.

> ## Adoption
>
> Adoption refers to how the customer uses and adopts a product or service without any issues

> ### Engagement
>
> How often or meaningful customer interaction and participation is overtime

Adoption metrics might include launching a new product to a group of users and having a high amount of them use or adopt it. Engagement metrics might include increasing the daily usage of a design feature or increasing orders and customer interactions.

Once you've defined the metrics that you'll be measuring, think about how you track these metrics. Evaluate which tools can help you collect the data you need to ensure you're staying on track. For example, if you're measuring business metrics like revenue, consider tracking that in a spreadsheet or dashboard, where you can easily spot gaps and trends. If you're measuring customer satisfaction, you can think of a way to incentivize customers to participate in regular email surveys and create a system to measure their responses when they participate. You can also utilize your project management tools to check on efficiency metrics, like what percent of tasks are completed or whether the project is progressing alongside the planned timelines.

> ### Have the appropriate stakeholders sign off on the success criteria.

Along with each success criteria on your list, include the methods for how success will be measured, how often it's measure, and who's responsible for measuring it. Share your success criteria document with your stakeholders and ask if they agree with how the project's success will be determined. It's also a good idea to have the appropriate stakeholders sign off on the success criteria. This way, everyone will be clear on who is responsible for which tasks, and you'll all thoroughly understand what the path to success entails. Keep this documentation visible throughout the duration of the project and clearly communicate it with your team every step of the way. They're the ones who will be attempting to meet all the different requirements, so don't keep them in the dark about what they're supposed to do or how they're supposed to do it. If done correctly, defining your success criteria should create greater alignment within the team and gie everybody better visibility into hwo to achieve success. Clarity around success metrics also helps teams prioritize which efforts are most impactful to their users.

> ### Defining your success criteria should create greater alignment within the team and give everybody better visibility into how to achieve success.

## Tracking and communicating success criteria

Remembering the SMART goals are **S**mart, **M**easurable, **A**ttainable, **R**elevant, and **T**ime-bound and help keep a project on track for success.

We can also determine the success of a project by the quality of the product, the ability to fulfill the needs of your customers, and the need to meet the expectations of your stakeholders.

### Product quality

The product, or final result, of a project has its own set of attributes that define success. The product attributes that are necessary for the products's success include completeness in features, quality of features, unit cost, usability, etc. The extent that a product is complete will contribute to the products's success. This can apply to any project in which you deliver a product or tangible outcome at the end. To keep us on track for success, we can create a list of product requirements to ensure that you do not miss anything. For example, if the project produces word processing software, you need basic features like text entry, formatting, saving, and printing. Since you require each feature to have a functional word processor by today's standards, you include these features on your checklist.

To measure the success of a product, consider including these metrics on your checklist:

- Track if you implemented the product's priority requirements
- Track and assess the product's number of technical issues or defects
- Measure the percentage of features you delivered or released at the end of the project

### What is important to the customers or stakeholders

We have to pay attention to product metrics, but we also have to be mindful of stakeholder and customer additional expectations for features and objectives. In the word processor example, a stakeholder may want to add an additional functionality to easily create tables in a document with text. Additionally, a strategic goal of the organization could be to create word processor software with more collaborative ability than the word processors currently in the market. Each component is necessary in order ot meet customer and stakeholder expectation. Think about what needs the project satisfies for your stakeholders or customers. These strategic goals tie back to the business case and the reason you initiated the project in the first place. Often, you can measure the fulfillment of strategic goals via user or customer metrics. Metrics to consider include:

- Evaluating user engagement with the product
- Measuring stakeholder and customer satisfaction via surveys
- Tracking user adoption of the product by using sales data

### Document, align, and communicate success

Understanding where we are and where we are going helps the project team determine if they are on track. As you learned in the video on this topic, you need to get clarity from stakeholders on the project requirements and expectations. There are many people involved with any project, and success will look different for each of them. You want to ask questions, such as:

- Who ultimately says whether or not the project is successful?:
- What criteria will be measured to determine success?
- What is the success of this project based on?

It is best practice to get the key stakeholders or the steering committee to review and approve your success criteria. This becomes a mutual agreement on how all parties define the success of the project.

## Key takeaway: Tracking and communicating success criteria

Remember, all projects encounter change. All parties must have continuous access and alignment to the success criteria agreed upon to avoid scope creep (uncontrolled change of the project's scope) or failed expectations at the end of the project. It's important to document success criteria upfront and continue to report on it throughout the project.

Click [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1E3OwXHMb25DpWHeJXzff9wqjuJSO6KH9aijNUAIUNpQ/template/preview?resourcekey=0-vgOO8PhLm_19ztOHb4eLJw) for a Success Criteria Template.

Click [here](https://d3c33hcgiwev3.cloudfront.net/tZL2CKGDTGmS9gihg9xpFw_6243c50ecb7a476eb772e17540d4f6ef_Same-Project-Different-Perspectives-PMI.pdf?Expires=1686182400&Signature=GL8n6yaSIWKNi5~cnw9ahTMev6FqxLTdJwwiWThbEFV3cOlhrrJrEUBRR~-4c4zMs7FjoC~F47qqxUkftbK0arFXQGXEx4EEgABHySFuetAaENIJD60SoT-9LMXTQAIi0xi2fet7RZBcHjzGEgLKjv~boJD2IitQV3P0vWrg0vw_&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLTNE6QMUY6HBC5A) for an article on how to manage expectations of stakeholders when defining success criteria.

## Using OKRs to evaluate progress

### Objectives and Key Results(OKRs)

Objectives and Key Results(OKRs) combine a goal and a metric to determine a measurable outcome. Setting OKRs is a technique that can help project teams define, communicate, and measure shared success criteria.

| Objectives                          | Key results                                                                       |
| ----------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| - Defines what needs to be achieved | - The measurable outcomes that objectively define when the objective has been met |
| - Describes a desired outcome       |                                                                                   |

### Communicating and tracking OKRs

Conducting regular check-ins and actively tracking progress with your team can help ensure that objectives are being met and that any issues are resolved as soon as possible.

**Share your OKRs with your team.** ONce you've created OKRs for your project, it's important to communicate them to your team so that everyone knows how to focus and align their efforts. You can do this by sharing a digital document, presenting them in a meeting, or adding them to an internal website. OKRs can help your project team stick to its goals, monitor which are falling short, and be continuously motivated to meet project objectives.

**Assign owners.** Assign an owner to every key result so that everybody knows who's responsible for what. This helps add clarity and increases accountability.

### Measuring progress

Measuring your OKRs is an important part of tracking and sharing your progress. One shortcut to determining the status of a project is to score or grade your OKRs. While scores or grades don't provide a complete assessment of a project's success, they're helpful tools for determining how close you came to achieving your objectives. You can then share your OKR scores with project stakeholders and team members as part of your overall project updates.

**Determine how you will score your OKRs.** OKRs can be scored in different ways. You can score based ona percentage of the objective completed, the completion of certain milestones, or a scale of 1 to 10, for example. You can also use a "traffic light" scoring approach, where red means you didn't make any progress, yellow means you made some progress, and green means you completed your objective.

The simplest approach to scoring OKRs is the "yes/no" method, with "yes" meaning you achieved your objective and "no" meaning you didn't. Using this approach, a key result such as "Launch a new widget marketing campaign" might be graded a 1 or 0 depending on whether it was launched (1) or not(0).

A more advanced scoring approach is to grade your key results on a scale. With this method, if a key result was to "Launch six new features" and only three new features were launched, the OKR might be graded 0.5. Generally, if they KR helped you achieve the objective, your OKR should receive a higher score; if it didn't, your OKR should receive a lower score.

**Set your scoring expectations.** With Googles 0.0-1.0 scale, the expectation is to set ambitious OKRs and aim to achieve an average of at least 0.6 to 0.7 across all OKRs. For OKRs graded according to percentage achieved, the sweet spot is somewhere in the 60%-70% range. Scoring lower may mean the team is not achieving what it could be. Scoring higher may mean the aspirational goals are not being set high enough.

**Schedule checkpoints.** It's important to regularly communicate the status of project OKRs with your team and senior managers. For example, it can be helpful to have monthly check-ins on the progress of OKRs to give both individuals and your team a sense of where they are. Typically, at the end of the quarter, you'll grade each of your OKRs to evaluate how well the team did to achieve its goals.

## Key takeaway: Using OKRs to evaluate progress

OKRs can help you define and measure your project's success criteria. In order for OKRs to be used to effectively meet your project's success criteria, it's important to:

- share them with your team,
- assign owners to each key result to ensure accountability,
- measure your OKRs' progress by scoring them, and
- track your OKRs' progress by scheduling regular check-ins with your team.

Click [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sLyiU71HEUpAp6YrwC-JHanhVbiFlwN8RRop9lSDVyA/template/preview?resourcekey=0-heMO9l_aBbAYg_-SRAA9_Q) for OKR Scorecard Template Doc

Click [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1S8nUtc2jfmoXEWoooTIcRBWN3DFvmqqYJABp659Rh-8/template/preview) for OKR Scorecard Template Sheet

[<---Back](../README.md)
