# Code 401 Class 19 Reading Notes

## [Python Regular Expressions Tutorial](https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/python-regular-expression-tutorial)

### Basic Pattern: Ordinary Characters

Ordinary characters are the simplest regular expressions. They match themselves exactly and do not have a special meaning in their regular expression syntax.

Example of ordinary characters used to perform simple exact matches:

```json
pattern = r"Cookie"
sequence = "Cookie"
if re.match(pattern, sequence):
    print("Match!")
else: print("Not a match!")

> Output: Match!
```

> Wild Card Characters: Special Characters, are characters that do no match themselves as seen but have a special meaning when used in a regular expression. Can be thought of as reserved metacharacters that denote something else and not what they look like.
>
> . - A period. Matches any single character except the newline characters
>
> Example
>
>re.search(r'Co.k.e', 'Cookie').group()
>
>'Cookie'

- `^` - A caret. Matches the **start** of the string.
  - Helpful if you want to make sure a document/sentence starts with certain characters.
- `$` - Matches the end of string.
  - Helpful if you want to make sure a document/sentence ends with certain characters.
- [abc] - Matches a or b or c.
  - [a-zA-Z0-9] - Matches any letter from (a to z) or (A to Z) or (0 - 9)
- \ - Backlash.
  - If the character following the backslash is a **recognized escape character**, the the special meaning of the term is taken.
  - Else if the charcter following the \ is not a recognized escape character, then the \ is treated like any other character and passed through
  - \ Can be used in front of all metacharacters to remove their special meaning.

> [Standard Library reference](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html#re-syntax) for a complete list.
>
> compile(patter, flags=0): can computer a regular expression pattern into a regular expression object.
>
> search(pattern, string, flags=0), can scan through the given string/sequence, looking for the first location where the regular expression produces a match.
>
> match(patter, string, flags=0), Returns a corresponding match object if zero or more characters at the beginning of string match the pattern
>
> findall(pattern, string, flags=0), possible matches in the entire sequence and returns them as a list of strings. Each returned string represents one match.
>
> finditer(string, [position, end_position]), finds all the possible matches in the entire sequence but returns regex match objects as an iterator.

## Things I want to know more about

Love these functions that 're' has.

[<---BACK](README.md)
